Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 101

South Gippsland Shire Council
Submission to Senate Economic References Committee
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of regional inequality in Australia
Background on South Gippsland
South Gippsland Shire is located 90 minutes south east of Melbourne. It has a
population of 29,000 and an area of 3,300 square kilometres with substantial coastal
frontage. It is best known as the location of Wilsons Promontory National Park.
Its major centres are Leongatha, Korumburra, Mirboo North and Foster. Other
significant townships include Nyora, Loch, Poowong, Kongwak, Koonwarra
Meeniyan, Dumbalk, Tarwin Lower, Venus Bay, Sandy Point, Port Franklin, Fish
Creek, Toora, Welshpool and Port Welshpool.
South Gippsland has over 7,000 businesses contributing to an annual output of over
$3.2 billion. The economy is significantly focussed on agriculture and is one of the
key centres of dairy production in Australia.
Submission
South Gippsland Shire has a strong, resilient and enterprising community. This is
evidenced by strong community participation in events and projects and a very high
rate of volunteerism, which at 29.3 per cent is significantly above the Victorian
average of 17.7 per cent.
However, there are a number of challenges that areas similar to South Gippsland
face in order to provide services in an equitable, cost-effective manner that
minimises disadvantage. These include:
•

A physically large area (approximately the size of greater Adelaide) but with
the population dispersed widely across the Shire in a large number of towns
and rural areas.

•

The capacity to service these 28 towns with diverse needs and infrastructure
requirements on a constrained funding base and 2 per cent rate cap. This is
exacerbated by a growing tree/sea-change population with different – often
unrealistic – expectations about service levels.

•

Maintenance of a road network of over 2,000 kilometres, much of which is
critical to support our agricultural industries.

•

More than one million visitors per year, which places considerable stress on
infrastructure, particularly in our coastal towns during the summer period.

•

Geographical challenges of a very diverse landscape that ranges from the
hills to the sea and has a very high rainfall.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 101

•

Susceptibility to natural disasters that have included major bushfires and
floods but more regularly, significant storm events.

•

Fewer options for students at post-secondary education levels and some
difficulties for employers seeking staff with the necessary skills.

•

Attracting and retaining skilled professionals – both for employment within
regional LGAs and in the wider community – is an ongoing challenge.
Residents who need to procure the services of those in specialist positions
are often required to travel further (and/or wait longer) than their municipal
counterparts.

•

Tele-commuting and access to professional services via the internet is not an
option in the many areas in which data speeds are slow and unreliable. Many
areas are still yet to connect to the NBN, and others are reliant on the lessthan-ideal satellite service.

•

Increasing transport costs are and will continue to be an issue when regional
municipalities are trying to broaden their employment bases. The expense of
getting goods to highly centralised marketplaces puts regional businesses at
an ongoing disadvantage.

•

Limited public transport options, particularly intra-town services.

•

Municipalities serviced by existing rail corridors across Victoria seem to be at
a relative advantage to those without trains. For example, Ballarat, Bendigo,
Geelong and West Gippsland/Latrobe Valley have all become attractive to
both businesses and new residents as the railway service provides an
efficient and viable option to the road network.

•

A small rates base and an increasingly competitive environment for grant
funding, which is making it difficult for smaller shires to compete. While a
somewhat circular argument, the larger LGAs are in a position to employ
more staff, often with very particular roles. This contributes to their grantseeking activities and therefore to their relative success in this area,
compounding the issues for regional municipalities.

•

The Index of Relative Socio-economic Disadvantage (SEIFA) for South
Gippsland is 990, below the Victorian average. It is considerably lower in
certain locations such as the Korumburra district, which has a SEIFA index of
742.2.

Mitigating these factors are a strong spirit of collaboration among Local, State and
Federal government agencies, industry and community bodies to find innovative
solutions to these challenges. A significant rollout of infrastructure across the Shire,

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 101

notably in roads, telecommunications and schools has also assisted to reduce
disadvantage.
While this is an overview of the issues affecting municipalities like South Gippsland,
Council would be interested in presenting more details on these matters if the
Committee conducts regional hearings. In particular, Council would like to expand on
potential causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and
regional areas, and on what policy settings could help address this inequality.

