Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

Northern Land Council

Submission to the Senate Economics References
Committee:
Regional Inequality in Australia

17 May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

1. About the Northern Land Council
The Northern Land Council (NLC) was established in 1973. Following the enactment of the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 (Land Rights Act), the NLC became an
independent statutory authority responsible for assisting Aboriginal people in the northern region
of the Northern Territory to acquire and manage their traditional lands and seas.
The Land Rights Act combines concepts of traditional Aboriginal law and Australian property
law and sets out the functions and responsibilities of the land councils. Section 23 of the Land
Rights Act sets out the NLC’s core functions, which gives it the responsibility to:








identify relevant Traditional Owners and affected people;
ascertain and express the wishes and opinions of Aboriginal people about the
management of, and legislation in relation to, their land and waters;
consult with traditional Aboriginal owners and other Aboriginal people affected by
proposals;
negotiate on behalf of traditional Aboriginal owners with parties interested in using
Aboriginal land or land the subject of a land claim;
assist Aboriginal people carry out commercial activities; obtain Traditional Owners’
informed consent, as a group;
assist in the protection of sacred sites; and
direct a Aboriginal Land Trust to enter into any agreement or take any action concerning
Aboriginal land.

In 1994, the NLC became a Native Title Representative Body under the Native Title Act 1993
(Cth) (Native Title Act), whose role and functions are set out under Part 11, Division 3 of the
Native Title Act.
In this capacity, the NLC also represents the Aboriginal people of the Tiwi Islands and Groote
Eylandt.
Within its jurisdiction, the NLC assists Traditional Owners by providing services in its key
output areas of land, sea and water management, land acquisition, mineral and petroleum,
community development, Aboriginal land trust administration, native title services, advocacy,
information and policy advice. The NLC has a core responsibility to protect the traditional rights
and interests of Traditional Owners and other people with interests over the area of the NLC,
which is constituted by more than 210,000 square kilometres of the land mass of the Northern
Territory, and over 85% of the coastline.

Page 2 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

NLC’s strategic vision is:
To have the land and sea rights of Traditional Owners and affected Aboriginal
people in the Top End of the Northern Territory recognised and to ensure that
Aboriginal people benefit socially, culturally and economically from the secure
possession of their land, waters and seas.1

1

Northern Land Council Annual Report 2016/17, p i.

Page 3 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

2. Inquiry terms of reference
On 14 February 2018, the Senate referred the following matters to the Senate Economics
References Committee for inquiry and report by the last sitting day in June 2019:
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;

b)

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;

c)

regional development policies;

d)

infrastructure;

e)

education;

f)

building human capital;

g)

enhancing local workforce skills;

h)

employment arrangements;

i)

decentralisation policies;

j)

innovation;

k)

manufacturing; and

l)

any other related matters.

This submission sets out to discuss the terms of reference, with particular reference to income
inequality within the Indigenous population and between the Indigenous and non-Indigenous
population. We draw heavily on a recent paper2 by Francis Markham and Nicholas Biddle from
the Australian National University’s Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, results
from which are reproduced with the permission of the authors.

2

Francis Markham and Nicholas Biddle, “Income, Poverty and Inequality,” 2016 Census paper (Canberra: Centre
for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, ANU, 2018), http://caepr.cass.anu.edu.au/research/publications/incomepoverty-and-inequality.

Page 4 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

3. Why does regional income inequality matter?
Income, or the money received by individuals or households each fortnight, is an important and
standard indicator of inequality. Income is an important economic indicator for several reasons.
First, although cash income is not sufficient for well-being, the income people receive is an
important determinant of well-being for both Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. The wellbeing of Indigenous and non-Indigenous people tend to rise as their income rises, although there
is a plateau point after which further increases in income have a reduced effect on well-being.
Second, income is an important indicator of the access that individuals and communities have to
the material resources offered by Australian society. Those without sufficient income may be
unable to access the goods and services needed to prosper. Third, household income is a driver
of further activity in the market economy, as households and individuals spend most of their
income on the purchase of goods and services locally. Consequently, increases in income in lowincome regions are likely to have flow-on effects for local economies that will lead to further
economic growth.
Income inequality also matters for several reasons. Inequality is a determinant of other social
outcomes. Many social indicators including life expectancy and physical health, education,
incarceration, social cohesion, and mental health and wellbeing worsen as income inequality
increases. 3 Indeed, it seems likely that this relationship goes beyond simple correlation, with
income inequality causing many of these negative outcomes.4 Finally, income inequality is one
indicator of social injustice. While there are many ways to conceptualise social justice and
injustice, 5 substantial income inequality is generally understood as an indicator of an unjust
society.
Regional income inequality matters for several policy reasons. First, regions with low incomes
tend to have higher poverty rates. Areas of concentrated income poverty have life-long impacts
on the life chances of those living in them. Second, from a human capital perspective, regional
inequalities may be partly ameliorated by the migration of individuals from low income to high
income areas.6 However, there are many reasons why people, especially Indigenous people, have
3

Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate E. Pickett, The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger (New
York: Bloomsbury Press, 2009).
4
Era Dabla-Norris et al., Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective (Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund, 2015), https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-DiscussionNotes/Issues/2016/12/31/Causes-and-Consequences-of-Income-Inequality-A-Global-Perspective-42986; Kate E.
Pickett and Richard G. Wilkinson, “Income Inequality and Health: A Causal Review,” Social Science & Medicine
128, no. Supplement C (March 1, 2015): 316–26, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.12.031.
5
Will Kymlicka, Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Introduction, 2 edition (Oxford ; New York: OUP Oxford,
2001).
6
Michael J. Greenwood, “Internal Migration in Developed Countries,” in Handbook of Population and Family
Economics, vol. 1 (Elsevier, 1997), 647–720, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-003X(97)80004-9.

Page 5 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

attachments to the place they live and wish not to migrate to areas with greater average incomes.
For this reason, regional inequality effectively penalises those unwilling or unable to move.
Third, regional inequalities are a policy issue because there is a social expectation that state and
territory governments will provide the same quantity and quality of services to all Australians,
regardless of where they live. Differences between regions require amelioration by the
Commonwealth government using the mechanism of horizontal fiscal equalisation, defined as
follows:7
State governments should receive funding from the pool of GST revenue such that, after
allowing for material factors affecting revenues and expenditures, each would have the
fiscal capacity to provide services and the associated infrastructure at the same standard,
if each made the same effort to raise revenue from its own sources and operated at the
same level of efficiency.

7

Commonwealth Grants Commission, “How HFE Works,” 2017,
https://www.cgc.gov.au/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=258&Itemid=536.

Page 6 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

4.

Regional income inequality and Indigenous people

Issues of regional income inequality are especially acute for Indigenous people. Regional
inequality matters for Indigenous Australians for the same reasons as for non-Indigenous
Australians, but colonialism means that Indigenous – non-Indigenous inequalities are also an
important policy issue.
On average, Indigenous people have lower incomes than nonIndigenous Australians, due to the cumulative effects of violence, dispossession and other forms
of colonial domination.8
Figure 1 below shows that there is a great deal of regional variation in Indigenous incomes.
While nationally, the median equivalised household disposable income for Indigenous people
was $557 per week in 2016, incomes are much higher in some regions than others. Within the
NLC’s area – more specifically defined using the ABS Indigenous Region delineations of Jabiru
– Tiwi, Nhulunbuy, Katherine and Tennant Creek (ABS Regions) – median incomes are among
the lowest in country. A national median income of $557 per week obscures much lower income
in the ABS Regions.
Similarly, national increases in median Indigenous incomes hide the fact that incomes are falling
in parts of the ABS Regions. Between 2011 and 2016, median equivalised household incomes
for Indigenous people rose by $45 per week nationally. But as Figure 2 shows, in three of the
ABS Regions (Jabiru – Tiwi, Nhulunbuy, and Katherine), median Indigenous household incomes
actually fell. Reductions in average incomes in these ABS Regions are especially alarming given
that they are falling from a very low base. In short, while strengthening labour markets in south
eastern Australia may have lifted incomes for the majority of Indigenous Australians, those in
the NLC regions have experienced falling incomes. Two factors are likely to be contributing to
falling incomes in these regions: the dismantling of the Community Development Employment
Projects (CDEP) and its replacement with the punitive and discriminatory Community
Development Programme (CDP) 9 ; and the stagnation of income support payments for those
unable to find work. Urgent policy action is needed to reverse this trend.
Furthermore, falling Indigenous incomes in the ABS Regions cannot be attributed to labour
market trends alone. Incomes of non-Indigenous people in the ABS Regions have risen while
Indigenous incomes have fallen. Figure 3 shows the change in the ratio of median Indigenous
8

Maggie Walter, “Aboriginality, Poverty and Health: Exploring the Connections,” in Beyond Bandaids: Exploring
the Underlying Social Determinants of Indigenous Health, ed. Ian Anderson, Fran Baum, and Michael Bentley
(Casuarina, NT: Cooperative Research Centre for Aboriginal Health, 2007), 77–90; Maggie Walter and Chris
Andersen, Indigenous Statistics: A Quantitative Research Methodology (Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press,
2013).
9
Kirrily Jordan, Better Than Welfare? Work and Livelihoods for Indigenous Australians after CDEP (Canberra:
ANU Press, 2016), https://press.anu.edu.au/publications/series/centre-aboriginal-economic-policy-researchcaepr/better-welfare.

Page 7 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

incomes to median non-Indigenous incomes across the country. A positive change in the ratio
indicates that median Indigenous incomes are converging with median non-Indigenous incomes,
while a negative rate indicates that the gap between median Indigenous and non-Indigenous
incomes is widening. As can be seen from Figure 3, the gap between Indigenous and nonIndigenous incomes in Jabiru – Tiwi, Nhulunbuy, and Katherine increased between 2011 and
2016, indicating that labour market conditions alone are unlikely to account for falling
Indigenous incomes in the ABS Regions.
5. Findings




Regional inequality in incomes for Indigenous people is increasing, with a growing gap
between Indigenous incomes in urban areas and remote areas
Indigenous median incomes are falling in much of the ABS Regions
The gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous incomes is closing in urban areas but
widening in remote areas

6. Recommendations
1. The Community Development Programme (CDP) should urgently be repealed and
replaced with a program that will create both employment opportunities and community
development for remote-living Indigenous people
2. The simplest way to alleviate poverty and reduce regional inequality is to increase the
income support payments to more adequate levels

Page 8 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

FIGURE 1: MEDIAN INDIGENOUS INCOME BY REGION, 2016. SOURCE: MARKHAM AND
BIDDLE (2018).

Page 9 of 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 102

FIGURE 2. CHANGE IN MEDIAN INDIGENOUS INCOME BETWEEN 2011 AND 2016 BY

REGION, ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION. SOURCE: MARKHAM AND BIDDLE (2018).

Page 10 of 10

