Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Australian Senate’s inquiry into

Regional Inequality in Australia
A Tasmanian Perspective

Authors:
Level of Which Submission
Has Been Authorised:
Contact:
Position:
Return Address:
Phone Number:
Date:

Jen Newman
Chief Executive Officer
RDA Tasmania
Craig Perkins
Chief Executive Officer and Director of Regional
Development
Level 1, 12-16 St John Street, Launceston TAS 7250
17 May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Contents
Regional Inequality in Australia ......................................................................................................... 1
Contents ......................................................................................................................................... 2
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................ 3
Purpose .............................................................................................................................................. 5
Terms of Reference ........................................................................................................................ 5
Focus of Submissions ......................................................................................................................... 5
Regional Development Australia – Tasmania .................................................................................... 6
Comments to address the Terms of Reference ................................................................................. 7
Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels ......................................................... 7
Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies ..................................... 8
Regional development policies .................................................................................................... 10
Infrastructure ............................................................................................................................... 12
Education ..................................................................................................................................... 14
Building human capital ................................................................................................................ 16
Enhancing local workforce skills .................................................................................................. 17
Employment arrangements ......................................................................................................... 19
Decentralisation policies .............................................................................................................. 20
Innovation .................................................................................................................................... 21
Manufacturing ............................................................................................................................. 22
Any other related matters ........................................................................................................... 24
Overview of Tasmania...................................................................................................................... 27

Cover photo credit – Premium Fresh

Page | 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Executive Summary
Regional Development Australia (RDA) Tasmania’s response to this inquiry can be summarised in
the following themes. These themes are used through the document to encapsulate the key
message from the content:



Public investment in transport and digital technology connects our regions



Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ



Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decisionmaking



Investing in regions can help alleviate growth pressures in our urban centres



The RDA network is a valuable resource for gaining an objective, local
perspective



Government has a role in risk mitigation and planning

Australia is a diverse country with extremes in geography, weather and the makeup of its regions.
Diversity leads to inequality because of the range of difference and variation, but this does not
mean that inequality necessarily equates to inequity. However, the divide between rich and poor
and those with opportunities and those without is expanding. The annual ME Bank survey
reported around 61% of households with ‘low levels of financial comfort’ reported ‘worsening in
their overall financial situation during 2017’. In contrast, almost 70% of households on high levels
of comfort reported that their ‘financial comfort improved during 2017’.1
For the purpose of this response it has been assumed that the term ‘regional’ has a connotation
of being non-urban or the areas outside of our larger cities; however, cities also experience
inequality and all have pockets of significant disadvantage.
Common themes across the terms of reference are to consider regions as heterogeneous and not
assume the same drivers operate across every community. Vibrant regions support key industries
such as mining and agriculture that underpin Australia’s economy. Public investment in transport
networks and digital connectivity will enable the necessary flow of people, services and products.
Digital connectivity is changing social networks, education and business and making geographical
isolation less of a barrier, but access to and use of broadband and internet can be low in regional
Australia.
While Tasmania provides more than its share of food production and exports, it will be difficult to
completely close the economic gap between our region and the rest of Australia. Tasmania’s
population is older, and ageing more rapidly than that of the rest of Australia; it is much smaller
than any other Australian state which limits economies of scale; and Tasmania is never likely to
1

ME Financial Comfort National Survey, Feb 2018

Page | 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

have some of the major economic drivers present in mainland states such as financial or
professional services sectors on the scale of Sydney and Melbourne, or mining on the scale of
Western Australia.
From a longer-term perspective, the keys to improving economic performance in Tasmania are
increased participation in employment, and higher levels of labour productivity. Education is a
foundation for personal success, as well as the economic and social benefits it creates. RDA
Tasmania welcomes the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote Education and the
recommendations it offers. The support from the Australian Government for the University of
Tasmania to move into the centre of our two largest regional centres provides the university with
the opportunity to re-set its roles and function and help mitigate our region’s relative
disadvantage in educational outcomes.
Supporting and connecting regions make them an attractive alternative to metropolitan life and
can help take the pressure off the high growth challenges of our largest cities. Infrastructure
investment in regions may not come with value capture capacity or high financial returns on
investment, but the impact on local industry and communities can be significant.
Collaboration between tiers of government, industry and community based on objective data is
critical to ensure that investment in regions is strategic, with measurable outcomes, and is
supportive of economic and social objectives.

Bruny Island from a distance – credit Bob Frost

Policies such as City Deals encourage broad, collaborative thinking and good governance. Of the
three tiers of government, the Australian Government has the broadest perspective and is well
placed to provide data and incentives to plan for the cities of the future. While there are
common themes and challenges across all cities; every region and city is unique. Homogeneous
solutions should be avoided to ensure long term sustainability, liveability and prosperity.
The RDA network is an existing resource into place-based solutions and knowledge. RDA
Tasmania is in the unique position of being a neutral organisation with relationships at every level
of government as well as community and industry. We are able to utilise these relationships to
facilitate dialogue and engagement with stakeholders; help to identify gaps and duplication; and
identify opportunities to support the growth and development of Tasmania.
The Australian Government has a core role in mitigating detrimental inequality and ensuring that
regions across the country can thrive and prosper.

Page | 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Purpose
This report has been prepared as a submission to the Australian Senate’s inquiry into the Regional
Inequality in Australia2. Only relevant aspects of the Terms of Reference are addressed in this
submission.

Terms of Reference
On 14 February 2018, the Senate referred an inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia to the Senate Economics References Committee for inquiry and
report by the last day on sitting in June 2019.
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
j)
k)
l)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
regional development policies;
infrastructure;
education;
building human capital;
enhancing local workforce skills;
employment arrangements;
decentralisation policies;
innovation;
manufacturing; and
any other related matters.

Focus of Submissions
The committee is interested in receiving submissions addressing the terms of reference. It would
like to hear about:
 experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and unequal
outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
 views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and
other areas
 analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
 examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper?
 policy settings which could help address inequality between regions.

2

https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/Regional_Inequality_in_Australia

Page | 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Regional Development Australia – Tasmania
Regional Development Australia (RDA) is a national network of committees fostering regional
economic development. RDA Tasmania work with all three tiers of government, regional business
and the wider community to boost the economic capability and performance of their region.
RDA Tasmania facilitates policies, programs and projects designed to strengthen human capital,
productivity, infrastructure, access to markets, regional comparative advantage and business
competitiveness; leading to increased economic activity and the creation of new jobs, along with
improved standards of living and working conditions.
RDA Tasmania:


Engages with stakeholders to identify initiatives that will deliver economic outcomes that
grow and strengthen their communities.



Builds partnerships, harnesses local leadership, marshal’s support, and encourages
cooperation between stakeholders to drive regional priorities.

RDA Tasmania is able to work with all levels of government, industry and community to pursue
challenges and opportunities relevant to our region. RDA Tasmania produces an annual Regional
Plan that outlines RDA Tasmania’s vision for the region and identified priorities.
Priorities are informed through statistical data in the regional profile, Australian and state
government policy imperatives and stakeholder consultation.

RDA Tasmania Priorities 2017
 Expand and grow economic activity in Tasmania
 Increase collaboration and efficiencies between federal, state and local government;
and between government and the private sector
 Improve educational attainment and employability skills
 Address the needs of Tasmania’s changing demographic profile

Some RDA Tasmania staff and committee members – credit RDA Tasmania

Page | 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Comments to address the Terms of Reference
The following comments are made against the categories provided in the inquiry’s terms of
reference:

Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels
Value Capture
The Australian Government has taken a number of approaches to consider land value capture for
infrastructure investments including the Financing infrastructures by value capture3 paper from
May 2017. It is prudent for governments to reflect on models of public finance expenditure and
possible means to increase the return on investment and maximise private sector input.
However, the issue is complex and the level and spread of value created should be taken into
account with assessment on a case by case basis if value capture is possible or in the best public
interest. For example, a bridge costs about the same regardless of whether it is constructed in a
highly condensed economic hub or a regional area. It is often more expensive to construct in a
remote region due to freight and labour costs. Yet while a new bridge may raise surrounding
property values in an urban area due to decreasing commuting time and increased access, there
may be no geographical capital gain for residents in a remote or regional area. While there may
be no case for value capture it does not mean that business and community value is not created;
regional bridge (and other infrastructure) construction may serve as a vital transport and freight
link between communities.
The Value Capture Discussion Paper produced by the then Department of Infrastructure and
Regional Development for consultation in November 2016 cited examples of successful value
capture in large, highly condensed cities. Examples of similar outcomes in low density, regional
Australia were less apparent. The focus on the financial benefits of harnessing value capture
creates the risk that regional Australia will become further disadvantaged if a form of value
capture becomes a necessary part of government infrastructure spending.
It would be a concern if projects with a high potential for value capture were prioritised by the
Australian Government at the expense of projects in more dispersed and regional locations that
have less or no capacity for value capture. If this occurred it would exacerbate the fiscal
disadvantage and divide that already exists.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

3

https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BriefingBook45p/ValueCapture

Page | 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Goods and Services Tax (GST) Distribution
Tasmania has been a major beneficiary of revenue from the goods and services tax (GST) in the
way it is distributed among the states and territories, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Commonwealth Grants Commission (CGC).
GST revenue is distributed with regard to differences in region’s capacities to raise revenue and
the need for and cost of providing those services. In 2017-18, Tasmania will receive $2.4bn in
revenue from the GST, equivalent to $4,573 per head of population. This is $1.3bn more than
Tasmania would have received had the GST revenue been distributed on an equal per capita
basis4.
Changes to existing arrangements of GST distribution would have a significant impact on the
region and would result in less government services and spending, and potentially higher fees and
taxes. Such an outcome would further exacerbate inequalities between Tasmania and other
jurisdictions and make closing the gap in these indicators even harder.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

Autumn trees Tasmania – credit Bob Frost

Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local
government policies
City Deals
The future of funding for cities will be about collaborative planning across government with
agreed priorities targeting funding for strategic projects. Challenges and opportunities can be
managed using a regional economic development approach.5
Infrastructure Australia considers infrastructure investment priorities at a national level, while
City Deals are a city scale policy. Thriving regional centres are an important part of providing
access to employment, services, health, education and employment across regional Australia,
while helping to alleviate growth pressures in our large urban centres.
City Deals represent a structured opportunity to examine the impact of government policy and
investment in a place-based context. They are not just about new infrastructure; the deals take a
holistic view including skills and education, social inclusion and connectivity which are vital to
long term sustainability and success.

4
5

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017
Regional Australia Standing Council, Framework for Regional Economic Development

Page | 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

The use of common data sets for evidenced based decisions such as the National Cities
Performance Framework developed by the Department of Prime Minster and Cabinet will assist in
providing a consistent approach for common goals, agreed across governments, and an ability to
measure their delivery over time.6

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decision-making

In addition to being strategic, City Deals will drive
reform
through
incentivising
actions
and
accountabilities at the national, state and local level.
Partnerships across government, industry and
community are critical to the success of regional
development efforts, as is a focus on place and valuing
the unique aspects of every region and community.
RDA Tasmania notes the recommendation of the
Committee for Economic Development of Australia
(CEDA) report How Unequal? Insights on Inequality
released in April 20187. These broad recommendations
include periodic independent reviews of inequality in
Australia and taking a place-based view of government
initiatives and assistance.
Hobart Waterfront – credit RDA Tasmania

RDA Tasmania has the view that in order to develop
regional cities we must support collaborative planning, good governance and investment in
enabling infrastructure and services that improve economic productivity.

Investing in regions can help alleviate growth pressures in our urban centres

Regional Perspective
The national RDA network is a resource with existing local relationships and connections across
government and regional stakeholders. RDA Tasmania collaborates with local community and
industry leaders to identify priority activities and issues that will drive regional economic
development.
RDAs provide feedback on regional issues through informal relationships with government
officials and by offering an objective, regional perspective on proposed policy and through formal
mechanisms such as parliamentary inquiries. The RDA network is a valuable resource for
understanding regional and equity impacts of government actions.
Local solutions generated through a place-based approach that considers local circumstances,
competitive advantages and involves collective governance are facilitated by RDA committees.
6

7

https://cities.dpmc.gov.au/performance-framework

https://ceda.com.au/Research-and-policy/All-CEDA-research/Research-catalogue/How-unequal-Insights-on-inequality

Page | 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Case study - South East Regional Development Association
RDA Tasmania was integral in developing an Economic Infrastructure Plan for South East
Tasmania in 2015. It was identified by RDA Tasmania and the South East Regional Development
Association (SERDA) made up of Clarence City, Sorell, Tasman and Glamorgan Spring Bay Councils,
that a large number of developments had been approved in South East Tasmania but this growth
lacked strategic oversight regarding the impact on common infrastructure such as energy, roads
and services. RDA Tasmania drove the development of the project scope and set timelines for
funding expenditure.
The SERDA report has resulted in a greater shared understanding of regional priorities,
demographics, growth and opportunities. Priorities identified are being used to guide investment,
focus resources and input into government policy. The SERDA South East Economic Infrastructure
Plan was endorsed by State Cabinet in October 2015.
As a direct result of the SERDA South East Economic Infrastructure Plan:
• The Hobart airport roundabout overpass is now a Tasmanian Government priority.
• Sorell and Brighton councils have now been included in the Department of State Growth’s
metropolitan transport reference group.
• SERDA worked with Skills Tasmania to develop a skills demand study for South East Tasmania
and is implementing an Employment Partnership.
• Investment has been prioritised into a SE Education Hub.

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decision-making

Regional development policies
Regional Development Australia (RDA)
RDA Tasmania supports economic development and planning, providing regular advice to all tiers
of government in relation to regional economic policy and projects. This includes working in
regional areas where industry has transitioned or businesses ceased operation.
In our view the following should be considered when addressing the needs of any regional
community




Obtain relevant and current statistical data that can provide an accurate analysis of the
region economic and social profile;
Consult with key local stakeholders including industry, community and government to
understand their needs ; and
Be open and transparent in all consultations and dealings to help deliver clear
recommendations in respect to regional priorities;
Page | 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Regional communities need to take ownership and the responsibility for structured decision
making and strategic planning. This includes supporting economic projects that deliver long
terms outcomes for the region, not necessarily projects that just have short term popularity
within the community or are short term focused.
The RDA network has strong local links and understanding and can provide a local perspective on
government policy. Every region has unique characteristics that may skew the intent of a policy
outcome resulting in inequality. RDA Tasmania provides informal feedback to relevant Australian,
Tasmanian and local government officers, and formal feedback through issues papers and
submissions.

Case study: 2016 extension to the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) for
international exports.
A paper produced by RDA Tasmania in March 2018 shows that the Scheme is creating jobs and
investment in Tasmania and is broadening markets for Tasmanian businesses. The report
includes interviews with 11 Tasmanian export businesses and demonstrates the positive impacts
the extension to the TFES (since 2016) has provided.
“This Case Study Report for International Exports has provided further evidence of the positive
impacts the TFES delivers for Tasmanian exporters and regional communities” said RDA Tasmania
Chairman Mr Tom Black.
“Most pleasing is that the report highlights the direct contribution made by some of these
Tasmanian export businesses to our regional communities, including for example at least 45 new
jobs and over $15 million of new investment in plant and equipment which is identified within
the report from just a few of the businesses interviewed” said Mr Black.
“Furthermore, international export container movements for July 2016 to June 2017 increased
by 11% on the previous year and July 2017 to October 2017, and saw an increase of 16% for the
same period the previous year. The demonstrated outcomes and resulting benefits to date prove
that the TFES scheme is a valuable and significant support mechanism that provides tangible
benefits for Tasmania.”

The RDA network is a valuable resource for gaining an objective local perspective

Regional Data and Regional Australia Impact Statements (RAIS)
Departments and agencies are required to complete Regional Australia Impact Statements (RAIS)
as part of policy development and the Cabinet submission process. This is a positive action in
ensuring regional impacts are considered by the Australian Government.
Regional publications and data sets such as ABS Data by Region, the Progress in Australian
Regions: Yearbook, State of Australian Cities, Labour Market Portal, Regional Australia Institute
data and the National Cities Performance Framework are examples of data that can help provide
a regional context and comparison.
Page | 11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

A national data set that run basic models and includes small (LGA?) scale similar to the data
provided by Id Profile and REM Plan would be very valuable in providing common data and
comparisons amongst regions.

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative strategies

Infrastructure
Connectivity
Tasmania’s remote location has been a historic inhibitor to economic growth. Increased
availability and quality of broadband communication to urban and rural Tasmania has seen its
remote location become less of a barrier.
The enviable lifestyle and environment of Tasmania is an attraction to those who are able to
relocate. Flexibility in work practices, more frequent and economic air travel and the availability
of a reliable broadband network is enabling professional and sea-changers to live productively in
regional centres.
However, broadband access and digital inclusion is low. According to 2016 Census data, 78.0% of
Tasmanian homes had access to the internet – less than in any other state or territory, and more
than 5 percentage points below the national average of 83.2%. The proportion of Tasmanian
homes with access to the internet is lower than the average for other nonmetropolitan areas of
mainland states.8
Most rural areas in regional Tasmania don not have access to fibre-based NBN services which
restricts data download capacity for agriculture and rural communities.

The NBN satellite service is also a significant issue for Tasmania. Due to the design of the service,
all NBN satellite services connect back to the base station in Eastern Creek, Sydney, so in order to
use the NBN satellite, Tasmanian users must backhaul from Sydney.
The Australian Digital Inclusion Index 20169 highlights that Tasmania is the only state going
backwards in digital connectedness, despite the NBN deployments that have occurred. Over
three years, Tasmania’s digital inclusion has decreased from 48.8 in 2014, to 48.2 in 2016.
8

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017
https://digitalinclusionindex.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Australian-Digital-Inclusion-Index-2016.pdf (Tasmania summary
page 24)
9

Page | 12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Tasmania’s scores were also the lowest nationally across all three sub-indices; Access,
Affordability and Digital Ability.
Digital Ability and the Affordability measure were the biggest contributors to Tasmania’s ‘digital
divide’ (both approximately 7 points behind the national average). In 2014, Tasmania’s ADII score
was 4.5 points behind Victoria, the most-included state; in 2016, it was 7.7 points behind. In
particular, the Affordability gap between Victoria and Tasmania widened significantly, going from
1 point in 2015, to 7.9 points in 2016.
Government investment in digital infrastructure, access and education is vital to ensure the rural
remote areas of the country remain connected.

Public investment in transport and digital technology connects our regions
Investing in regions can help alleviate growth pressures in our urban centres
Tourism
Record and sustained growth in tourism in
Tasmania has created jobs and investment
raised the profile of the state with national and
international visitors. While this is good for
trade and businesses in the tourism sector it is
putting pressure on public assets that are not
benefiting from the financial windfall.
Investment in rural road infrastructure, public
amenities and in the maintenance and
upgrading of facilities in Tasmania’s iconic
national parks and reserves is required to
maintain brand and experience. The wilderness
experience that Tasmania is known for is
Wine Glass Bay– credit Tourism Tasmania Visual Library
located out in our regions where small local
councils have the least capacity in investment and are not gaining financial benefits through
increased rates or income.

RDA Tasmania views on infrastructure grant programs
The RDA Tasmania Committee has operated for over twenty years through various guises and
during this time has experienced a mix of incentives and policies to support growth in regional
Australia.
There is an essential role for policy and investment incentives to be the hand that guides regions
to the next stage in their growth, or to help recover from major setbacks that would otherwise be
beyond the communities’ capacity. It should be at the forefront of the Australian Government’s
intentions to use policies such as infrastructure grant programs to support sustainable growth.
Here are some of the lessons RDA Tasmania have learnt which should be considered when
designing new grant programs and policy:
Page | 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

1. Economy leads the way – Tasmania’s fate lies in its employment opportunities, which in
turn depends on the competitiveness of its industries.
2. Grant success is not as important as the capacity to deliver it – granting money to
organisations that do not have business plans or local funding support does not help our
regions. If leaders or managers are not in place to implement a funded project it is
unlikely to achieve the outcomes expected. Consultation and the grounding of ideas with
local leaders can help ensure effective and efficient policy implementation.
3. Regions are not always rational – communities are more comfortable planning for what
they want rather than what they need. At its worst, this may lead to unnecessary
duplication of regional infrastructure that creates more of a long term liability than
benefit.

Australian Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative strategies

Education
Overview Tasmanian region
Tasmanians are, in general, less well-educated than people
living in other parts of Australia.
Only 19.3% of Tasmanians aged 15-75 have a university degree
or higher, the lowest proportion of any state or territory, and
more than 7½ percentage points below the national average.
This proportion has risen by 2.4 percentage points over the past
three years – but the corresponding national average has risen
by 2.8 percentage points over the same period, so the gap has
actually widened since 201410.
A smaller proportion of Tasmanian Year 10 students continue
their studies on to Year 12 than of those in any other state or
the ACT – or in the Northern Territory if the Indigenous population is excluded from the
comparison. Tasmania’s apparent retention rate to Year 12 fell back by 1.8 percentage points, to
70.8%, in 2016, after rising by 5 percentage points between 2012 and 2015. By contrast, the
national average apparent retention rate rose to a new record high of 82.9%. Apparent retention
rates in the ACT and in South Australia are now both over 90%11.
School education outcomes are a key determinate for future employment, financial and social
success. RDA Tasmania welcomes the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote
Education and the implementation of the key recommendations.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ
10
11

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017
TCCI Tasmania Report 2017

Page | 14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote Education
The final report of the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Education was
released in January 2018. According to this report: ‘The key challenge for regional, rural and
remote education is ensuring, regardless of location or circumstances, that every young person
has access to high quality schooling and opportunities.’12
‘National statistics show there is a persistent relationship between location and educational
outcomes when data for the various measures is aggregated..much remains to be done to bridge
the gap between the achievements and opportunities of RRR students and those most commonly
associated with their urban counterparts.’
RDA Tasmania supports the four priorities have been identified to improve RRR education and
opportunities:
1. establishing a national focus for RRR education, training and research to enhance access,
outcomes and opportunities. This could be achieved through the formation of a taskforce,
the appointment of a Commissioner for RRR education along the lines of the recently
appointed Commissioner for Rural Health or by using some other means.
2. focussing on four critically important resources for successful learning and building young
peoples’ futures—leadership, teaching, curriculum and assessment. Central to successful
schooling are leaders, teachers and support staff who are dedicated to a place and its
people, and who have the ingenuity and resources to take fundamentals for a quality
education like curriculum and assessment and bring them to life in ways that are highly
engaging.
The Tasmanian Government committed to a $4.2 million investment to support and develop the
skills of those working in education through the Developing our Workforce Strategy.
The Department of Education works with the University of Tasmania to deliver initiatives to
attract, develop and retain a skilled education workforce. A specific initiative is the Teacher Intern
Placement Program, which provides an opportunity for suitable student-teachers to be based fulltime in ‘priority-area’ schools.
3. addressing the patchiness of ICT in RRR locations. The availability, accessibility and
affordability of ICT for RRR schools, teachers, students, parents and communities have to
be improved, and improved quickly. ICT is now and will only grow to become more so,
integral to education and lifelong learning.
With one in five Tasmanians not accessing the internet at home there are lots of students not
benefitting from the advantages of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Exposure
to ICT is essential for students as every industry sector uses ICT. From a regional development
perspective, Tasmania’s geographical isolation means that the use of ICT to connect is vital, but
the cost and availability of broadband connection is less competitive than in larger urban centres.

12

https://www.education.gov.au/independent-review-regional-rural-and-remote-education

Page | 15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

4. transitioning into and out of school. There is still work that needs to be done to ensure all
young children start school healthy and well prepared. RRR students at or near the stage
of making the transition from school to employment, training, further study or
combinations of them, are often confronted with issues and costs which their
counterparts in urban areas do not have to worry about.
Connecting schools and learning with the local business community and potential local jobs is
important. Keeping local people in local employment helps build resilience and capacity in
regional Australia. Local communities can provide insight into the challenges and opportunities
facing their region and can formulate tailored local solutions.

Case Study – BIG, Burnie:
Burnie in north-west Tasmania has used the Collective Impact framework to unite the community
with education providers to improve attainment and student aspirations. Burnie City Council
initiated the program called BIG, and the community were quick to support it. BIG projects
include Dream Big that enables every one of the 150 Grade 5 students into 80 businesses for a
day to explore their future. Everyday Counts is a wraparound service for at-risk non-attending
families and Up Close & BIG is a business lunch with keynote speaker from a key local industry.
BIG plans for the future include tailored pathways for individuals.

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decision-making

Building human capital
Tasmanian perspective – labour force overview
Tasmania’s unemployment rate was lower than three (or
occasionally four) of the mainland states between December
2016 and May 2017 after a long period of being one of the
highest unemployment rates in the country. However, since
September 2017 Tasmania has once again had the highest (trend)
unemployment rate of any state or territory. 13
Tasmania is not without its opportunities however there is a
pressing need to improve quality of life. Tasmanians are poorer,
on average, than other Australians. They earn less from working
than other Australians; although more of them own their own
homes, those homes are on average worth less than homes in
other parts of Australia; and Tasmanians have fewer other assets
(investment properties, superannuation savings, shares and the
like) than other Australians. Tasmanians are more likely to be
reliant on social security payments than other Australians.
13

Bangor, Dunnally – credit Tourism Tasmania
Visual Library

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017

Page | 16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

However, the 2016 Census also found that 17.5% of Tasmanians aged 15 and over undertake
voluntary work for an organisation or group, a higher proportion than in any other state or
territory except for the ACT and South Australia and 2 percentage points above the national
average. It was also 2.1 percentage points above the average for non-metropolitan regions of
mainland states14.
The most important asset of any region is its people. Public investment in supporting people to
re-enter the work force and live at a basic standard is an important part of building regional
capacity.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

Enhancing local workforce skills
Tasmanian perspective
It is a priority of RDA Tasmania to improve educational attainment and employability skills.
Educational attainment is positively linked to higher levels of employment, increased labour force
participation, higher wages and higher levels of productivity. Tasmania is not positioned to
compete internationally on commodity prices, low staff costs or by offering an unregulated
business environment. Instead it needs a capable workforce that combines technical and business
management disciplines to compete on quality and innovation.
Labour productivity is a good example of the restrictions of using only data comparison in policy
development.

Case Study - Tasmania’s Labour Productivity15
Tasmania’s problem in this context, is that the six industries which nationally have aboveaverage levels of labour productivity account for less than 11% of total employment in Tasmania,
compared with more than 16% of national employment. The seven industries whose labour
productivity is between two-thirds and 100% of the all-industry average account for about 42% of
employment in Tasmania, compared with 49% of employment nationally.
By contrast, the six industries where labour productivity nationally is less than two-thirds of the
national all-industry average account for almost 48% of employment in Tasmania compared with
less than 35% of employment nationally.
So Tasmania’s low relative labour productivity is not just about staff skills and capacity, it is a
product of the industry base in region that is very different to many other regions in Australia.

14
15

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017
Data taken from the TCCI Tasmanian Report 2017

Page | 17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

While the industry mix that leads to low productivity measures is difficult to change, it remains
that Tasmania and regional Australia in general have lower educational attainment than
metropolitan areas. Continued investment into skills and training, including equitable access to
this training for those in remote areas are vital to maintain and grow vibrate regional centres.
To help raise skills and education levels, the Tasmanian Government supports training
organisations through Skills Tasmania to deliver tailored training to Tasmanians. A range of
subsidies and programs exist to support individuals to gain vocational certificate qualifications
and assist learners to progress to higher qualifications in areas of industry demand.
The 2017-18 State Budget includes the commitment of:


$17.1 million to introduce a targeted payroll tax rebate for two years from 1 July 2017 for
employers of eligible trainees and apprentices and for 12 months for eligible young
people aged between 15 and 24 years from 1 July 2017



$4.1 million over four years for the Employment Partnership: Jobs Action Package – a
memorandum of understanding between the State Government, The Tasmania Council of
Social Services (TasCOSS) and the Tasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (TCCI)
to increase labour market participation and productivity across Tasmania, with a
particular focus on regional communities



$200 000 per year for three years – $600 000 in total – to support the Whitelion Work
Ready Program. The program provides support, including addressing vocational and nonvocational barriers to employment for high-risk young people aged 16–24



$225 000 for a one year extension to the Beacon Foundation supporting Beacon’s
expansion into schools to deliver employability skills, work experience, coaching and
mentoring in Tasmanian schools in disadvantaged communities.

These local initiatives and funding complement the Australian Government programs and support
delivered by the Department of Small Business and Jobs. A representative from the Hobart office
of the Department is a member of the steering and advisory group in Skills Tasmania and the
location of staff locally enables regular communication and partnerships to support post school
education and employment.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

Irrigation at Thorpe Farm, Bothwell – credit RDA Tasmania

Page | 18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Employment arrangements
Liveability
Liveability is a concept used to describe what people experience as positive in their communities.
Generally, it’s defined as the degree to which a place supports the quality of life, health and
wellbeing for people who live or visit there. Liveable places attract highly skilled and creative
people who drive innovation and economic growth.
Attractive regional centres take the pressure off our high growth cities and provide a competitive
advantage to attract and retain skills and leaders in regional Australia
Tasmania is a remarkably liveable place and is recognised as an attractive place to live and work.
Tasmania’s natural heritage, diverse range of arts and culture, lifestyle and public open spaces are
all attributes of a liveable place. Promoting these
attributes will be an important task in encouraging
economic growth, particularly in regional areas16.
Recent accolades for Tasmania include Launceston’s
designation as Australia’s most family friendly city17 and
Hobart becoming the travel guide Lonely Planet’s top
place to visit18. However, the state’s reputation of
having a low cost of living is not as true as it once was.
The 2018 Anglicare Rental Affordability Snapshot 19
singled out Tasmania as one of two regions in the
country where soaring tourism has led to a "rapid
decline" in affordable rental properties. The report finds
that housing affordability in and around the state's
capital is at such a low point that more than half of the
low-income household types measured had no
affordable rental options available.
Lack of affordable housing is combined with Tasmanian
wages remaining the lowest in the country, and the
Evandale – credit Tourism Tasmania Visual Library
Commsec’s State of the States April 2018 report 20
revealing Tasmania recorded the strongest population growth in the country. From June 2006 to
June 2016, 70 per cent of Tasmania's population growth occurred in the greater Hobart region.
A Housing Summit held by the State Government in March 2018 discussed short and long term
solutions to tackle the region’s housing shortage, but many measures such as tax changes and
increasing the density of residents in existing housing stock or building new dwellings are not easy
fixes.

Investing in regions can help alleviate growth pressures in our urban centres

16

Goal 4 State Economic Development Plan
Suncorp Bank Family Friendly City Report, 2013
18
Lonely Planet's Best in Travel Top 10 Cities for 2013
19
Anglicare Rental Affordability Snapshot 2018
20
https://www.commsec.com.au/stateofstates
17

Page | 19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Decentralisation policies
Tasmanian perspective
RDA Tasmania encourages the Australian Government to make use of the RDA network, which
can support and implement policies and programs and encourage and celebrate best practice
regional development.
There are many examples where Commonwealth entities currently exist in regional Australia.
From a Tasmanian perspective, this includes, but is not limited to functions such as Centrelink call
centres, the Commonwealth Defence Materials Organisation, the Australian Government's Major
Projects Approval Agency, and the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development that
all have responsibilities that extend beyond Tasmanian stakeholders.
Investment in and establishment of appropriate information technology and communication
systems are critical. This includes location of servers (as opposed to remote connection) and
video conference facilities. However, supported by the National Broadband Network and ever
improving technology this should become less of an impediment.
Benefits to relocating to rural areas include lower cost of living and cheaper office rentals.
Regional areas such as Launceston or Hobart maintain good air links to mainland capitals,
including Canberra. There is also growing anecdotal evidence of an ever increasing pool of
qualified people that have moved from the high density and expensive capital cities, or have
shown a want to move if opportunities arise.
Regional areas have lower staff turnover that results in continuity, retention of corporate
knowledge and lower costs. In addition, a wider spread of human resources beyond Canberra can
create a shared understanding of the diversity of people, place and issues across Australia and
more decentralised intelligence to increase policy and program delivery and effectiveness on the
ground.
It is the view of RDA Tasmania, that activity in the agricultural and water sector, maritime (civil,
defence and Antarctic), health (food and nutrition) could successfully be relocated to Tasmania.

Investing in regions can help alleviate growth pressures in our urban centres

Decentralisation of education
A recent study by Nous Pty Ltd and the Centre for Policy Studies 21 found that Regional
Universities Network (RUN) universities spend $1.59 billion and students spend $480 million in
campus regions. RUN universities deliver an additional $1.7 billion to real GDP in their regional
economies, through growing the skilled workforce in the regions and increasing wages; driving

21

http://www.run.edu.au/resources/Submission%20on%20indicators%20and%20impact%20of%20regional%20inequality.pdf

Page | 20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

demand through increases in private and government consumption and international and
interstate exports; and contributing to industry through research and knowledge capital.
RUN universities teach around 115,000 students or around 9 per cent of enrolments at Australian
public universities.2 They educate 23 per cent of Australia’s domestic, regional and remote
students at the undergraduate level, 16 per cent of its low socio-economic status (SES) students
and 17 per cent of its Indigenous students.
While Tasmania is not included in the RUN, these statistics tell the local story of the benefit in
supporting regional universities for their economic, social and educational impact.

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decision-making

Sun through trees – credit Bob Frost

Innovation
RDA Tasmania supports initiatives which introduce students to entrepreneurship because it helps
students to learn transferable and adaptive skills that can help them transition from compulsory
schooling and equips students with business management and technical ability for their adult life.
The Tasmanian Government provides funding support to Enterprize Tasmania for the
establishment and maintenance of co-working spaces, digital facilities and business start-up
support in Hobart and Launceston, designed to facilitate engagement between education,
business, investors, and commercial partners.
Enterprize Tasmania is partnering with the University of Tasmania, CSIRO and Definium
Technologies to develop LoRaTAS22. LoRa networks are a long range, low power data network
that allows sensing systems to transmit data over long distances cost effectively and reliably.
LoRaTAS is a key enabler in Internet of Things technology and Tasmania is a neat geographical
location to establish the pilot project with local research institutions and expertise.
Tasmania’s small and stable population with a high density of research and tertiary institutions
makes it a perfect test bed for innovative projects. For instance, the Tasmanian Government is
partnering with the Australian Government, local government, the University of Tasmania, and
Telstra to deliver smart city analytics for better educational outcomes, new 3D virtual city
modelling tools for city planning processes, an innovation framework and hub, the development
of a road map for the city of the future and planning the deployment of smart technology in aged
care and smart emergency response systems.
22

https://www.loratas.io/who-are-we/

Page | 21

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Case study – nextgen Challenge:
The nextgen Challenge is a weeklong practical course where teams of students from Years 9 and
10 develop and grow an idea for a successful business.
Illuminate Education & Consulting developed and runs the nextgen Challenge, where students
work over five days to develop a business that solves a problem in their community. To prove the
effectiveness of the business, students have to produce a business plan with two years of
financial forecasting, deliver a sales pitch, and create elements of a marketing strategy. The skills
are not just ones useful for running a business; students learn about stress and team
management, independent learning, budgeting, planning, creative thinking and speaking in public
which will impact them for the rest of their schooling and working lives.
The program partners with industry and education stakeholders to provide professional advice
and encouragement to the students. Challenges are designed to fit with the local economy and
tackle contemporary issues. It is held across Tasmania and is spreading quickly across mainland
states.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing Hubs
Regional manufacturing is an important local economic driver with towns and economies built
around key manufacturing activities. Government has a role to support manufacturing through
ensuring adequate freight, energy, digital connectivity and skilled staff are available for wealth
creating industries across regional Australia.
The following case study is a Tasmanian example of supporting a local manufacturing leveraging
long-term private investment:

Case Study - Bell Bay Manufacturing Industry Precinct
Since 2012, RDA Tasmania has been working with a broad partnership made up of community,
industry and government stakeholders to understand and pursue opportunities to diversify and
develop the economy of the Bell Bay industrial precinct. Bell Bay houses Tasmania’s largest heavy
industrial estate and is collectively responsible for 59 per cent of all Tasmania’s manufactured
exports.
Outputs from this work include:
• Coordinating a knowledge tour of manufacturing precincts in Melbourne
• Production of a developer’s guide and interactive map of the Bell Bay industrial precinct

• A new position funded by industry, George Town Council and the Tasmanian Government and
hosted by RDA Tasmania. The Bell Bay Manufacturing Precinct Project Officer executes a work

Page | 22

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

program set by the Bell Bay Manufacturing Precinct Sub-committee to pursue common goals such
as industry attraction, joint tendering, group procurement and training.

Policy and regulation – cider place of origin
Tasmania is known as the Apple Isle and cider production from local fruit is increasing in
production and popularity. According to Tasmania’s Agricultural Scorecard, Australian ‘spending
on all categories of alcohol, except traditional beer, is forecast to rise with spending on cider
increasing fastest at an annual rate of
19.5%’23.
Government has a role in regulating
industry to ensure wealth creating local
production is supported. This in turn
supports farmers, producers and
businesses in regional Australia.
Wine drinkers greatly value knowing
where the fruit in their wine originates.
For this reason, grape wine has its own
standalone legislation setting out origin
rules for labelling. However, cider is not
covered by this separate legislation and
relies on country of origin labelling rules
(updated in 2016). Country of origin
Tractor in orchard – credit Willie Smiths
labelling can be confusing and misleading
for cider products. The Made in Australia label is used if the product has been substantially
transformed in Australia; and substantial transformation includes fermenting. Thus, any cider that
is manufactured (fermented) in Australia, regardless of whether local fruit is used, must say Made
in Australia.
It is welcomed that the Australian Government is investing $500,000 as part of the $50m Export
and Regional Wine Support Package to build the brand proposition and marketing strategy of
Australia’s craft cider industry in export markets; and the country’s craft cider producers are
being invited to contribute to the plan. This support acknowledges the importance of premium
local products made through value-adding to our primary production.
However, further changes to refine the country of origin labelling (such as adopting the wine
regulations for cider) to ensure product not made with local fruit is labelled clearly for consumers
to make informed choices, is another important role that government can play in supporting local
regional growers and manufacturers.

Government policy should be based on data-driven, collaborative decision-making

23

http://dpipwe.tas.gov.au/Documents/Tasmanian%20Agri-Food%20Scorecard%202015-16.pdf

Page | 23

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Any other related matters
Natural weather events and key resources
How regions plan and work together is becoming more important as climate change and extreme
weather events become more prevalent. The Australian Government has a role in disaster
recovery in partnership with state and local government. Emphasis on effective investment in
mitigation will help ensure sustainability of regional areas that are particularly vulnerable to these
risks and have a varying capacity to resource and respond to impacts.
In Tasmania, floods and record low dam levels impacting on energy generation in 2016 have been
timely reminders of the importance of risk mitigation and planning.
Climate change modelling was prepared for the Tasmanian Government by the Antarctic Climate
and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre. Local climate profiles have been created for each
of Tasmania’s 29 LGAs and detail future scenarios for climate by the end of the 21 st Century for
the LGA from the Climate Futures for Tasmania project.24
The major centres of Hobart, Launceston, Burnie and Devonport are all projected to have
increases in average temperatures and a change in the frequency, intensity and duration of hot
and cold extremes of temperature, with the number of summer days and the average
temperature of very hot days increasing.

Government has a role in risk mitigation and planning

Devonport Port – credit TasPorts

Coastal Shipping Reform
Tasmania as Australia’s only island state has a unique and crucial reliance on shipping as a lifeline
for its economy. Currently Australian flagged vessels owned by local shippers provide domestic
freight services for Tasmanian exporters, most commonly to the Port of Melbourne. Some direct
international shipping also occurs but it is limited.
The provisions of Coastal Trading (Revitalising Australian Shipping) Act 2012 prevent wholesale
competition between local shippers and foreign shippers on domestic routes. However,
significant lobbying from mainland exporters and industry associations continue to prompt a
review of these provisions in the hope of allowing more competition, increased service provision
and reduction in freight costs.
24

http://www.dpac.tas.gov.au/divisions/climatechange/adapting/climate_futures/local_government_area_climate_profiles

Page | 24

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

In general terms, more competition is attractive. However, if local shippers exit the Bass Strait
shipping service due to an inability to compete with foreign vessels on price and service, the
impact on Tasmania could be significant. Recent experience has shown that the Bass Strait run is
not very attractive to international shippers and without this vital link, our economy that is based
on off-island trade will weaken. Consequences of local shippers exiting the may include higher
unemployment, a breakdown in Tasmanian logistics supply chains (where the shippers have their
own “in house” logistics service) and flow on effects to Tasmania’s key industry sectors.
Insulating the local shippers from foreign competition by retaining the current legislation does
not mean that “targeted” cabotage relief cannot be offered to foreign shippers who provide
service to Tasmanian exporters where no local shipping service provision is available. This option
should be pursued in order to support Tasmanian exporters who can access international
shipping routes directly from Tasmania.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

Population Ageing25
Australian Government policy and service provision in aged care is becoming increasingly
important as the population ages and people have more age related health and service needs.
Tasmania has the oldest and most rapidly-ageing population of any Australian state or territory.
At the 2016 Census, the median age of Tasmania’s population was 42 (that is, half of Tasmania’s
population was younger than 42 and half older), five years above the corresponding figure for
mainland Australia. At the 2006 Census, Tasmania’s median age of 39 years was only two years
higher than the mainland average.
In 2016, 19.4% of Tasmania’s population was aged 65 or over, the highest of any state or
territory, and 3.7 percentage points above the average for mainland Australia. The proportion of
Tasmania’s population aged 65 or over rose 4.4 percentage points in the decade since the 2006
Census, whereas mainland Australia only rose by 2.4 percentage points.
Conversely, 29% of Tasmania’s population in 2016 were aged between 20 and 44, the lowest of
any state or territory and 5.7 percentage points below the mainland average. A decade earlier,
the proportion of Tasmania’s population in this age range was only 2.4 percentage points below
the mainland average.
Tasmania’s age demographics present a number of challenges, including maintenance of
sufficient workforce numbers, managing increased demand on health and social services and
providing appropriate infrastructure such as transport and accommodation26.

25
26

TCCI Tasmania Report 2017
RDA Tasmania Regional Plan – Demographic Change Page 50

Page | 25

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Age profile Tasmania (% of workforce) vs the National, January 201627

The population in Tasmania’s urban centres is growing, albeit slowly, while the overall state
population remains almost static at just over half a million people28, indicating that there is
movement from regional and rural areas into the cities. Urban based local government areas
(LGAs) are more likely to have higher population growth, a younger median age and a greater
proportion of their population who earn over $1,000 per week, compared to rural LGAs.29
The Australian Government’s role in supporting an ageing population and providing aged care
services is vital in regional areas that are generally older than metropolitan populations. Policy
and funding should continue to be provided in concert with other tiers of government, the private
sector and community.

Australian regions are not homogenous, so the approach to each must differ

Launceston Seaport Boardwalk courtesy of Tourism Tasmania Visual Library

27
28
29

TCCI Tasmania Report 2016
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/3101.0
Trends - The Tasmanian Labour Market Review August 2012

Page | 26

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Overview of Tasmania
Tasmania is Australia’s only island state with a
population base of 520,877 residents (2017)30.
Tasmania as a region is highly diverse,
incorporating our capital city, other major urban
centres and rural communities, through to the
sparsely populated south west wilderness. Like
many other regions across Australia, Tasmania is
experiencing a migration of the existing population
into urban centres. Local and state government are
partnering to streamline and modernise planning
and regulation.
While Hobart, the state’s capital in the south is a
centre for services and government administration,
the major centres in the north are based around
key industry activity and port access for Tasmania’s
export focused economy. Hobart has experienced
increased traffic congestion issues since 2016 and
more focus has been placed on transport efficiency
and public transport options.
Economy
Commsec’s State of the States April 2018 report31 showed that Tasmania has held onto fourth
position on the national economic performance rankings and it can be broadly grouped with the
ACT. Tasmania is top-ranked on relative population growth and is second placed on equipment
investment. Population growth is the strongest in 7 years.
Tasmania’s unemployment rate of 6.0 is higher than the rate of 5.8 per cent recorded in March
2017, equal to Queensland and less than WA’s 6.4 per cent unemployment; but higher than every
other state or territory. However, employment in the region increased during March 2018 and is
2.0 per cent higher than a year ago. Full-time employment only increased by 0.9 per cent, while
part-time employment increased by 4.0 per cent since March 2017. The participation rate of 61.1
per cent is higher than the rate of 60.2 per cent recorded the previous year32.
However, Tasmania’s average wage remains the lowest in the country33 (see chart below) and the
2018 Anglicare Rental Affordability Snapshot34 singled out Tasmania as one of two regions in the
country where soaring tourism has led to a "rapid decline" in affordable rental properties. The
report finds that housing affordability in and around the state's capital is at such a low point that
more than half of the low-income household types measured had no affordable rental options
available.
30

http://stat.abs.gov.au/itt/r.jsp?databyregion
https://www.commsec.com.au/stateofstates
32
Australian Bureau of Statistics Labour Force Survey March 2018
33
Parliament of Australia State Statistical Bulletin 2017
34
Anglicare Rental Affordability Snapshot 2018
31

Page | 27

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Average Weekly ordinary time earnings (AWOTE)

Without continued business investment and growth, the economy will retain its historical
dependence on government funding and administration. Employment opportunities attract and
retain talented people and enable wealth creation and distribution across the community.

Population
Commsec’s State of the States April 2018 report35 revealed that Tasmania recorded the strongest
population growth in the country and ABS data shows that from June 2006 to June 2016, 70 per
cent of Tasmania's population growth occurred in the greater Hobart region.
Tasmania's population is ageing more rapidly than any other state in Australia and records below
average health outcomes. The region is also one of the most decentralised with 57 per cent of
the population living outside the capital city.
Natural Assets
Our strengths lie in our natural assets including the availability of clean energy and water for
agricultural expansion. Tasmania’s primary production sectors including agriculture, dairy,
horticulture, viticulture and aquaculture are supporting economic and export growth. The
drought and floods over 2016-2017 and the record low dam levels for energy generation have reemphasised the importance of our natural assets to our people and economy.
Tourism, Art and Culture
Tourism is growing strongly, boosted by a plethora of national and international awards and a
visit from the Chinese President in November 2014. Record cruise ships visits and airport traffic
reflect Tasmania's current popularity as a tourism destination.
Government Investment and Stimulus
The region has the benefit of commitments in infrastructure investment by Australian and
Tasmanian Governments including the Devonport Living City project and the Launceston and
Hobart City Deals. The economic stimulus these projects provide to the civil construction sector
will have flow-on effects to the wider economy and community.
35

https://www.commsec.com.au/stateofstates

Page | 28

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 103

Grants such as the National Stronger Regions Fund and Building Better Regions Fund stimulate
economic growth. Being selected as one of the ten regions to receive Regional Jobs and
Investment Package funding will provide further stimulus for investment and economic activity
for areas outside Hobart.

Hobart City courtesy of Tourism Tasmania Visual Library

Challenges
Division over major economic investment projects and industry growth can be a constraint. Being
an island presents challenges in freight and transportation. Government, industry and community
all have a part to play in meeting the local challenges of providing employment and economic
prosperity, balanced with lifestyle and sustainability values.
Education and skills are increasingly linked to productivity and living standards. Developing a
highly skilled and educated population can be the difference between a resilient region and one
that struggles. Education attainment levels are highest in the urban areas of the State.
Comparing Tasmania’s regions
RDA Tasmania has partnered with the Regional Australia Institute to rank the competitiveness of
Tasmania’s Local Government Areas and south, north and north-west regions. The south
generally ranks highest across economic indicators, followed by the north, with the north-west
ranking lowest, including some that rank amongst the lowest in Australia. This indicates that the
regions and cities in Tasmania exhibit unique characteristics that are not homogeneous, revealing
that even for smaller regional cities a ‘one size fits all’ approach may have limited effect.

Page | 29

