Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Senator Chris Ketter
Chair
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

PO Box 1877
Mackay, QLD 4740
www.rdamiw.org.au

Email: economic.sen@aph.gov.au

Dear Senator Ketter,
RE: Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Regional Development Australia Mackay-Isaac-Whitsunday Inc (RDA MIW) welcome the opportunity to make a
submission to the Senate Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
RDA MIW is a regional leadership entity that aims to bring together all levels of government and industry to
enhance the growth and development of our region and we have partnered with the following regional
stakeholders to make this submission:
-

Greater Whitsunday Alliance;
Isaac Regional Council;
Mackay Regional Council;
Mackay Tourism;
Tourism Whitsundays; and
Whitsunday Regional Council.

The Mackay-Isaac-Whitsunday (MIW) region encompasses 90,379 km2 with a population of 173,904 persons.
The region produces almost $16B Gross Regional Product (GRP) which represents 2.31% of Queensland’s GRP
and 0.43% of Australia’s GRP. Our GRP per capita of $93,870- is almost 35% higher than the Queensland
average and almost 25% higher than the Australian average, meaning we “punch well above our weight” in
relation to regional economic output.
This above average economic output does not translate directly into economic equality. A comparison of key
economic and demographic data between the MIW region and the Brisbane City Council (BCC) has been
developed to reveal some of the key differentials between the two. This data is included in Appendix A of the
submission. The SEIFA index summary in Table 7 reveals the MIW region has a significantly larger population of
those in the more disadvantaged quintiles (47.5%) than BCC (15.2%). We have attempted to unpack what
causes this differential in disadvantage in the region and propose some policy settings that can assist regional
Australia in achieving economic equality moving forward.
When looking at the demographics data it is clear to see the following:
-

Population growth in MIW is below BCC over the last ten years and more specifically the last five years
where negative population growth has been evident – Table 1.
Age demographics of population in MIW reveal significantly lower proportion of population in the 20-39
age groups, highlighting differential in level of tertiary students and young professionals – Table 2.
Country of birth statistics reveal a significantly lower percentage of NESB population within the MIW
highlighting disparity in migration destination – Table 3.
Education rates at both secondary level and tertiary level show MIW has a significantly lower proportion
of persons who have completed Year 11 or 12 and a significantly lower proportion of person who have
completed a bachelor degree or higher – Table 5 & 6.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Education and Immigration
This data reveals the flow of school leavers from the region to capital cities for tertiary education purposes due
to a lack (or perceived lack) of access to appropriate education opportunities. It also reveals the flow of
Australia’s migrant intake to capital cities rather than the regions. As such, the regions often lose their best and
brightest human capital at an early stage. They have not been able to offset this loss of human capital through
skilled migrant intake as this human capital, which has driven recent national population growth has been largely
capital city centric. This loss of the best and brightest human capital becomes a negative feedback loop with
regions then lagging in being able to provide the business/personal services/innovation that this human capital is
associated with.
RDA MIW recommends that the Australian Government designs education policy and programs that encourage
the best and brightest human capital to remain in the regions. This could be through capital grants funding
programs for regional education infrastructure or through guaranteeing funding for regional courses where there
is demand from regional industry.
RDA MIW also recommends immigration policy that encourages skilled migrants to the regions to provide capital
city level services and make regional Australia more liveable.
Connectivity
Connectivity is critical for the attraction of retention of human capital needed to ensure regional Australia is able
to grow and prosper at the same rate as capital cities. Connectivity is also critical to allow industry to thrive in
the regions providing the diverse range of employment opportunities and economic output that is essential for a
sustainable region.
Air connectivity is an area of concern for the regions. The high cost of airfares in regional Australia act as a
disincentive across a number of key areas:
-

Families/Individuals with ties in capital cities or other parts of Australia are reluctant to relocate when it
is prohibitively expensive to return “home” for family occasions or emergencies.
Families/Individuals are reluctant to relocate when it is prohibitively expensive to fly to capital cities for
significant cultural, social and sporting events.
Tourism development in the regions is stifled when it prohibitively expensive to fly into/out of regions.
Industry development is stifled when it is prohibitively expensive to undertake the corporate travel
necessary in some business models.

Road Connectivity also has an impact on development of industry in the regions. Road connectivity can make or
break a region with industry developed in regions where road connectivity leads to lowest cost base in supply
chains. This can be seen with port trade. Investment in roads which link ports to markets has a significant impact
on the viability of that port and the associated industry related to those supply chains. The MIW region is well
aware of this issue and as such continue to advocate for key east-west road connectivity infrastructure including
the Mackay Ring Road Stages 2 & 3, and key north-south road connectivity infrastructure including the flood
mitigation of the Bruce Highway at Goorganga Plains. Without this type of critical road infrastructure, regions can
lose their natural geographical advantage and we can see product flow to routes which do not maximise industry
supply chain efficiencies.
Finally digital connectivity is also critical for region equality. Digital connectivity allows for industries of the future
to be developed and keeps families/individuals connected with those in other regions. Internet connections in the
MIW region are less than those of BCC highlighting a level of digital divide – Table 4. Mobile blackspots in
regional Australia also need further work. Mobile blackspots result in safety issues and productivity issues across
regional Australia and we look forward to providing more information on this issue and local areas of concern in
the upcoming Regional Telecommunications Review.
Overall, RDA MIW recommends continued targeted investment into the roads infrastructure needed to ensure
that industry is developed with the most efficient supply chains possible. We also recommend air route policy and
programs that incentivise the airlines to develop new cheaper routes across regional Australia, increasing
demand and driving industry and population growth. Greater transparency is also required in current
arrangements to ensure that competition is encouraged. Too often we see competition in the airlines drive route

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

prices down, only for one competitor to drop out of that particular market, which results in no competition and a
return to prices that reflect that lack of competition.
Volatility of Regional Economies
Unemployment rates, median house prices and median rent data (Tables 8, 9 & 10) highlight the volatility of the
MIW region economy. This is representative of large parts of regional Australia, whose economies are heavily
dependent upon natural resources based industries such as mining, agriculture and tourism. These three key
industries which drive a large portion of regional Queensland’s economy are driven by commodity
prices/exchange rates which are impacted by global economic conditions and are largely out of the control of
industry within the region.
A key to reducing the volatility within regions is diversification. This diversification starts with keeping our best
and brightest in the regions and seeing them develop industries of the future in regional Australia. Government
can also play a role in diversification of the regions through a clear, equitable regionalisation/decentralisation
policy. Whilst moving a few agencies and staff from Canberra and the capital cities to the regions has an impact,
this impact is only positive for those regions that the agency/staff are moved to and potentially has a negative
impact on those regions that utilise these agencies and are now potentially less connected. As an example it is
significantly cheaper to fly from Mackay to Brisbane to meet with an agency than it would be to fly from Mackay
to Cairns to meet (noting that they are roughly the same distance away). A clear regionalisation/decentralisation
policy that incentivises industries into the regions would have much greater impact than ad-hoc public sector
decentralisation. Any policy would need to ensure regionalisation/decentralisation has a two-fold effect of
reducing congestion in capital cities (and surrounding areas) and providing economic growth for the regions. As
detailed by the Regional Australia Institute (RAI)i “as we confront the challenge of a 40 million population, for

every 100,000 Australians who choose to live in growing small cities rather than our big five cities, the RAI
estimates that an additional $50 billion will be released into the economy over 30 years in reduced congestion
costs and increased consumption”. This decongestion benefit will only be unlocked if the competitiveness of
regional and remote industry and communities are maintained.

100% Fly-in Fly-Out (FIFO) practices also have a negative impact on regional economies and incentivise capital
city living. When FIFO is promoted as the only workforce solution and genuine choice is removed from the
equation, it impacts long term sustainability. Whilst FIFO plays a critical role in the resource sector’s workforce
toolkit, 100% compulsory FIFO does not allow for normal market forces to prevail. As an example, in the recent
mining downturn market forces would have normally dictated that as housing and rental prices fell in regional
mining towns, a portion of the working population would return to the region. This is not possible under the
100% compulsory FIFO model. This whole model impacts regional liveability with non-resident workers not
invested in the community eroding the social and human capital needed for buoyant regional economies.
Cost of Living
It would be remiss to not mention the high cost of insurance in Northern Australia when looking at regional
inequality. Table 11 reveals that cost of insurance differential between MIW region residential properties and
similar properties in BCC is significant and in most cases between 2 to 3 times higher in MIW. This significant
insurance differential combined with fluctuations in rental/house values discourages human capital from moving
to northern Australian regions. Whilst house prices/rentals could be smoothed through diversity of industry, the
high cost of insurance in the north is something that needs to be rectified. Whilst RDA MIW welcome the ACCC’s
Northern Australian Insurance Inquiry, we reiterate that this is an issue that needs to be addressed and normal
market forces do not seem to have addressed the issue in the past. A combination of stamp duty/GST
exemptions for Northern Australian Insurance policies is one lever that the various levels of government have
available to them, along with the potential for mandating that all insurance companies doing business in Australia
have a certain level of policies in the north. This may drive the competition necessary to drive down prices.
Regional Funding Programs
Finally, we would like to close out with commentary on Regional Funding Programs. Whilst programs such as the
Regional Growth Fund, Building Better Regions Fund and the Regional Jobs and Investment Package are
welcome, the competitive nature of these programs seems to place greater emphasis on quality of application
than on the regional economic benefit of the project in the longer term. The current model favours larger, wellresourced applicants and does not encourage longer-term project planning as applicants often rush to come up
with projects when funding rounds are announced.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Key changes to funding programs recommended under this submission include:
-

-

Funding buckets available for project planning and business cases. This would allow regions and
applicants to develop solid business cases for projects and compare these business cases to assess best
“bang for buck”.
Potential for allocations per region with funds able to be held over from year to year. e.g.: if a region
was allocated $10M pa they could utilise this for a number of smaller projects each year, a larger
project each year or a larger project over a three-year period. There would still need to be a
methodology for selection of projects, however this could potentially be done regionally and ensure that
projects had broad regional support.

A vehicle for this type of funding could be “small” city deals that give some autonomy to regional centres to take
ownership of their own economic destiny with the support of all levels of government.
With greater planning, greater regional control and flexibility around use of funds we would see regions place
greater emphasis on ensuring that they were building infrastructure that made a real difference to regional
economies.
In summary we believe that a focus from all levels of government will be required to improve equality across the
regions and policy decisions that prioritise economic development in non-metropolitan Australia will be required.
With higher voter numbers in metropolitan areas the decongestion benefit of regionalisation/decentralisation will
have to be clearly defined and explained to ensure that any efforts in this area are politically palatable, however
without a focus on dispersing our growing population into regional Australia we will not be able to truly see the
nation realise its economic potential.
If you have any questions in relation to this submission, please contact RDA MIW CEO, Ben Wearmouth on

Yours sincerely

Supported by:

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Appendix A
Note:

Tables 1 – 10 have been taken from Queensland Government Statisticians Office – Regional Profile –
Mackay SA4 vs Brisbane City Council

Table 1 - Average Annual Population Growth
2007-2017

2012-2017

MIW Region

0.9%

-0.1%

Brisbane CC

1.8%

1.7%

Table 2 - Estimated resident population by age and sex

Table 3 - Country of birth
Born in Australia

Born Overseas (ESB)

Born Overseas (NESB)

MIW Region

77.2%

6.6%

5.6%

Brisbane CC

63.6%

10.1%

20.6%




ESB – English Speaking Background
NESB – Non-English Speaking Background

Table 4 - Internet Access
MIW Region

80.6% of dwellings access internet

Brisbane CC

88.0% of dwellings access internet

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Table 5 - Highest Level of Schooling
Year 9 or 10 or equiv

Year 11 or 12 or equiv

MIW Region

32.4%

49.1%

Brisbane CC

15.2%

73.2%

Table 6 - Non School Qualifications
Bachelor degree or
higher

Adv Dip or Dip

Certificate

MIW Region

10.3%

6.5%

26.4%

Brisbane CC

32.6%

9.3%

14.7%

Table 7 - Index of Relative Socio-Economic Disadvantage
Quintile 1
(most dis)

Quintile 2

Quintile 3

Quintile 4

Quintile 5

MIW Region

16.3%

31.2 %

23.7%

21.5%

7.3%

Brisbane CC

5.6%

9.6%

18.7%

24.6%

41.6%

Table 8 - Unemployment Rate

Table 9 - Median value of residential dwelling sales

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 104

Table 10 - Median rent of a three bedroom house

Table 11 – Residential Insurance Comparisons
Dec-17
Insurance Type

Address

Amount of Cover

Excess

Contents at a Rented Dwelling

Rosella 4740

$

71,700.00

$

550.00

$1,248.15 CGU

Contents at a Rented Dwelling

Yeronga 4104

$

71,700.00

$

550.00

$901.40 CGU

Building & Contents - Owner Occ

Andergrove 4740

Building $330,800Contents $ 66,200-

$ 1,000.00

$4,682.48 VERO

Building & Contents - Owner Occ

Everton Park 4053

Building $330,800Contents $ 66,200-

$ 1,000.00

$1,767.42 VERO

Landlords Building & Contents & Loss of Rent Walkerston 4751

Building $380,000Contents $20,000Loss of Rent $19,000-

$ 1,000.00

$1,713.67 CGU

Landlords Building & Contents & Loss of Rent Northgate 4013

Building $380,000Contents $20,000Loss of Rent $19,000-

$ 1,000.00

$820.93 CGU

Insurer Difference $ Difference %

Building & Contents

Dolphin Heads 4740

Buildings $859,500Contents $100,000-

$ 2,500.00

$5,768.41 CGU

Building & Contents

Hamilton 4007

Buildings $859,500Contents $100,000Buildings $500,000Contents $71,000-

$ 2,500.00

$2,256.78 CGU

Building & Contents - Strata - Duplex

i

Premium

$

346.75

38.5%

$

2,915.06

164.9%

$

892.74

108.7%

$3,511.63

155.6%

Regional Australia Institute 2016, Deal or No Deal? Bringing Small Cities into the National Cities Agenda, viewed 31st July 2017,
http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Deal-or-No-Deal-Bringing-Small-Cities-into-the-National-CitiesAgenda_April-2016_FINAL.pdf

