Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 106

Submission to the Federal Government’s Inquiry into Regional
Development and Decentralisation
May 2018
Introduction
Horsham Rural City Council is pleased to submit to the Federal Government’s Inquiry into
the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia. This submission covers a
number of issues we believe are relevant to the Terms of Reference.
Background – Horsham Rural City Council (HRCC)
Horsham Rural City Council (population 20,000) is the regional capital of the Wimmera
Southern Mallee and services a regional population of 55,000. Horsham is strategically
located on the Western Highway and National Freight Route 300km west of Melbourne and
400km east of Adelaide. Horsham is part of the Regional Capitals Victoria alliance, one of
the ten largest regional councils in Victoria. With over 500,000 people living in our regions
Victoria wide, Regional Capitals are well placed to absorb excess population growth from
Melbourne.
HRCC advocate for the importance of regional capitals to ensure strong and sustainable
regional and rural areas. This includes having: a pro-active stance on development;
effective regional advocacy; strong community engagement; embracing innovation and new
technology; and robust strategic planning for sustainable growth.
Decentralisation
Horsham Rural City Council strongly supports the decentralisation of government bodies to
regional areas. The relocation of Federal and State Government departments to regional
capitals will help take the service and infrastructure pressure away from major capital cities
(in our case Melbourne) which is struggling with: increasingly congested road and rail
infrastructure; declining housing affordability; rapid growth in outer fringe suburbs; and the
loss of valuable agricultural land on the urban fringe.
Decentralisation of entities and operations to regional Australia can provide significant
advantages for both the large capital cities and the regional centres.
Planned decentralisation of government services as well as infrastructure investments
should align with and capitalise on the major strengths of each region – ‘functional
decentralisation’. Horsham has strong functional synergies with the work of the Federal
Department of Agriculture and associated science and research industry agencies and
organisations.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 106

It is important to note that discussion and planning for decentralisation should include
continued investments in connectivity (high speed internet and mobile coverage) and
transportation (particularly the return of passenger rail to the western part of Victoria and
the duplication of the Western Highway) that will be required to maximise the success of
decentralisation into western Victoria over the next decade.
Transport and connectivity infrastructure
Improving transport in all forms is the key to sustainable transition to regional cities.
Horsham’s role as the regional capital of the Wimmera is based firmly upon the national
road and rail links between Melbourne and Adelaide. These links provide access to markets
for our regional industries and tourism. Strong transport links attract professionals to
regional centres, diversifying the economy and increasing resilience. These same links
ensure equitable access for regional residents to specialist health services based in larger
centres. The development of the Wimmera Intermodal Freight Terminal (WIFT) in 2012 was
a collaborative project between local, state and federal governments, and private industry.
Horsham Rural City Council was the key driver of this project which has created a strong
logistics chain for the Wimmera region for the next 10-20 years. Strong commitment at
State and National level is needed to maintain and improve transport networks and regional
connectivity to capital cities and major ports including the ports of Melbourne, Geelong and
Portland.
An improvement in public transport is also required. The eight Councils of the South West
of Victoria and the Wimmera believe that the return of passenger rail to the western part of
the state is a significant economic driver, a key factor in providing increased employment
opportunities and has an important social aspect for our communities to provide access to
services in Melbourne and Ballarat. Connectivity to regional capitals and state capitals
improves the attractiveness of our regions to live, work and invest. The recent Grampians
and Barwon South West Regions Passenger Services Cost and Feasibility Study identified the
return of passenger rail to the regional capitals of Horsham and Hamilton as a key economic
and social imperative at a cost of $369million (refer www.westernrail.com.au )
The Western Rail project fits strategically with the planned standardisation of rail in western
Victoria as part of the $400million Murray Basin Rail Standardisation Project.
Strong government policy and funding for major and minor road networks in regional
Victoria is also vital to ensure easy and safe travel within rural areas and linking regional
capitals to Melbourne.
Essential to the equitable access to services and opportunities is telecommunications
infrastructure. The 2016 Census showed that the internet was not accessed from 21.9% of
dwellings in Horsham local government area. This figure is far above both the state (13.6%)
and national (14.1%) levels.
Knowledge intensive industries become location independent where reliable, affordable
internet access is available. With equal access location decisions then become lifestyle

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 106

based and this is increasingly becoming a differentiating factor between growing and
stagnating communities and economies.

Education
State and Federal Government need to support regional capitals through the development
and implementation of policies (and funding) to support further education and job creation
that will attract and retain professional workers in regional areas. Access to high quality
education at all levels is essential to attract and retain people in our region. Strong
government support of tertiary institutions (i.e. Federation University in Horsham) is
essential to ensure that people can undertake undergraduate tertiary studies in key
workforce shortage areas i.e. nursing and education. Promotion of work placements in
regional capitals as part of tertiary studies is another policy and funding area that needs to
be developed by all levels of government. Sampling rural living and the benefits of our
lifestyle is a key factor in people choosing to live and work in regional Victoria on a
permanent basis. Additionally, accessing tertiary education locally reduces the financial
burden on regional students and assists to reduce the migration of young people out of
regional areas.
There is also a need for continuing focus on vocational training in regional areas, in
particular, VET in schools programs and post-secondary vocational training. The success of
Longerenong College in providing an Advanced Diploma in Agriculture showcases the
potential and need for increased vocational education training and degree level agricultural
courses which can feed into the strong agricultural research industry that exists in the
Wimmera.

