Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

BULLOO SHIRE COUNCIL
SUBMISSION TO THE SENATE ECONOMICS REFERENCES COMMITTEE
economics.sen@aph.gov.au
RESPONSE BY MAYOR JOHN FERGUSON ON BEHALF OF THE BULLOO
SHIRE
CONTACT DETAILS
Council@bulloo.qld.gov.au
Phone: 0746218000
Attention
Committee Secretary
Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

25 May 2018
Committee Secretary
Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Mark Fitt,
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
I am writing on behalf of the Bulloo Shire Council with a brief submission to the
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia. Please
see below an introduction to our Shire followed by individual responses to the
questions.
About the Bulloo Shire Council
The Bulloo Shire is the third largest Shire in Queensland and includes the towns of
Thargomindah, Hungerford, Noccundra, and Cameron Corner. Thargomindah is the
hub of the Bulloo Shire and lies on the Bulloo River, approximately 1000 km due
west from Brisbane along the Adventure Way. It has 3 other townships Hungerford,
Noccundra and Cameron Corner, where the 3 States of Qld, NSW and SA meet. The
main industries are Agriculture, resources, tourism and government services.
http://www.visitbulloo.com.au/
1. Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities
and unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
The Bulloo as a remote outback town is presented with additional barriers, long
recognised in many reports and studies, and they are summarized below:
• Low levels of population retention
• Remoteness and accessibility
• High air fare costs for the one public transport offering - air
• High construction costs translating into limited development
• Land access is constrained to either landholders or small townships
• Access to affordable housing due to low lending ratios
• Low levels of advanced technologies and lack of technology
• Volatility due to climate change and reliance on mining and agriculture
• Tourists are ‘put off’ by the perception that all road networks are unsealed as
well as the considerable driving distances between towns
These issues constrain development opportunities and also limit local home
ownership. The Council is a major employer and provides considerable housing and
this also considers to a low home ownership statistic. For those that can afford to
buy, bank lending ratios are also very low (40:60) so considerable amounts of capital
are required for purchasing even small and inexpensive homes.
Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

The corporate nature of the Council employee/employer relationship also translates
into low levels of entrepreneurship and risk taking especially in relation to business
start-ups.
2. Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between
capital cities and other areas
The main causes of the Bulloo Shire Council’s inequality compared to metro areas
are:
• our remoteness
• high costs of living, construction and development
• Cyclical dominance of agricultural and mining sectors
3. Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
Whilst the main barrier to development is remoteness, isolation of the townships and
access to our region, these have a negative effect on other major sectors such as
employment (low levels of staff retention); access to skilled workforce; business &
investment attraction; high travel costs; cost of living in general; access to
specialized medical services and more.
3.1 Transport
Road Funding is critical for all State roads to improve economic viability, tourism and
lifestyle. This investment is multi-dimensional and both Industry and Tourism need
good roads to connect our many Queensland attractions that are spread across both
the Outback and the State. Currently the Queensland growth corridors are coastal
and this directs significant amounts of funding to these areas. Whilst that is
important, equitable funding should be considered, not only to improve economic
viability, communication and connection for smaller communities. It should also be
acknowledged that civil construction is a major employment activity for many small
and remote councils so that this underpins employment and local spend.
3.2 Commonwealth Funding
Ndrra Flood funding (Climate Change)
The Commonwealth changes to the method of funding road damage under the Ndrra
flood program have been greatly welcomed throughout Queensland as it now allows
Council day labour workforces to participate and plant to be used for restoration
works. Road making is still a critical activity for the Council and employs 50% of the
workforce.There is a need for the same approach for drought through an ‘exceptional
circumstances’ assessment process as in times of pro-longed drought the roads
break up just as significantly however due to a lack of water and over a longer period
of time.
Commonwealth Drought Support and Relief programs have been a critical success
factor during the 2014 – 2019 and have allowed many landholders to remain on
properties building resilience. 2017/18 has been an exceptionally dry year, unlike
many of our other Queensland counterparts and given the short good season in
2016, local landholders have remained in maintenance mode rather than building
self-reliance. This is because environmentally whilst many areas may have
experienced one or two good seasons, the climate has meant that this has been
followed by significant drought. It must be acknowledged that resilience building is a
Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

slow process and thus this takes time. Currently exceptional circumstance support is
still required to help maintain communities and populations.
These programs also highlight the importance of the consideration of a national
climate change policy position at the Federal Level. This would then allow more
strategic alignment (and assistance) for Local Government.
Intergovernmental Financial Assistance Grants
Commonwealth Financial Assistance to Local Government – A detailed review of the
National Principles governing the distribution of the Commonwealth Financial
Assistance
Grants was endorsed at the 2017 conference especially in relation to those small
and remote councils that are heavily reliant on subsidy and support.
The Commonwealth’s grant programs need to be reviewed to ensure that smaller
areas are able to access funds such as the Regional Growth Fund. This $10m grant
(50:50 subsidy) was out of the reach of many Councils including ours, however we
are just as in need of economic growth support to create jobs.
Continued funding for significant economic development projects, such as the
Thargomindah Geothermal Project, is vital. It is also important to highlight that
prospectus development needs to be supported to allow remote Councils to bring
more projects to market.
3.3 Health Services
There is still more opportunity for funding and telehealth in rural and remote and we
highlight the success of initiatives such as the “Heart of Australia’ to provide
specialist services on a rotational basis to rural communities. This is a wonderful and
innovative solution and should be supported and the model replicated for all
specialist and allied health services.
Currently the RFDS provides an excellent service in Thargomindah however this is a
fly in fly out service at great cost to the Commonwealth. We would like to see skills
built at the local level so that local communities such as ours could work towards a
sustainable model.
We raise that subsidies for transport and travelling costs in relation to community
care programs should also be reviewed to ensure equity as travel is an inevitable
part of the remote lifestyle.
Age care accommodation options needs to be considered as our communities age.
Technology and robotics could add significant value to the construction costs of
these types of options and more research and experimentation should be done in
this domain.
The Bulloo Shire still has a volunteer ambulance officer model, this is not safe and
should be reviewed.

Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

3.4 Communication
Connectivity is still an issue in remote areas such as ours as the majority of the
landholders only have satellite access. Given the contribution to both State and
National GDP additional options through Telstra should be canvassed. The Federal
Government pays significant sums to providers such as Telstra under their Universal
obligations policy. This should be better directed at filling the infrastructure gap and
exploring technological innovations to establish low cost and high quality options.
There may also be radio technology that can be supported to fill the gap in
communication requirements, supplementing expensive satellite communications
and allowing businesses to have multiple options for different data sets.
3.5 Tourism
The economic benefits of tourism to remote communities are very significant
however much of the tourism product is either under developed or only in the early
stages. Commonwealth investment in development packaging would be instrumental
in fostering and growing economies and opening u Australia to the world. Current
funding is aimed at promotion and marketing and development is a real gap. In
addition seed funding for new ventures should be considered especially in relation to
tourism start ups eg 4 wheel drive tourism etc. Tourism development can add
significantly to our overall and local economies as well as offer new and interesting
employment opportunities.
3.6 Education
Education is the great equaliser, however remote education need to ensure that
students particularly in the later stage on secondary education are disadvantaged
compared to their urban counterparts. This is largely due to two factors – curriculum
development and connectivity. Connectivity is the single biggest issue in preventing
the offer 21 st century skills and access to University. Without this access this is
creating second class outcomes which will inevitably manifest in poor social
determinants of health including poor employment outcomes. This does not place us
well now or into the future.
3.7 Renewable Energy
The Bulloo Shire has a major geothermal and solar project underway in order to
provide better energy outcomes to the whole town. What is also necessary is to
leverage this investment into industry and population attraction and skills. Support for
end of grid projects is vital.
3.8 Air Transport Costs
The Bulloo Shire has Rex Airlines arriving twice a week and this is subsidised at the
State level. However, given that this is our only public transport, the cost of airfares
in remote areas is becoming a significant issue for residents and children returning to
school. The Bulloo Shire supports accessible pricing for all rural residents.

Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

4. Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper?
We believe that four concepts could alter the prosperity of regions, especially remote
regions.
These are:1. Zonal tax concessions – review and revival of contemporary tax concessions
(see Attachment 1)
2. Renewable energy as innovation (Attachment 2)
3. Focused economic development on enablers
4. Population policy
4.1 Zonal tax concessions for Remote living
Agriculture
From an agricultural perspective, the region has been settled since the late 1870’s. It
was an early route for colonial exploration through explorers such as Leichhardt,
burke and Wills and others on their way to the gulf. It has been a significant base for
the Kidman Empire since the turn of the 20th century and has strong and robust
supply chains for organic beef and sheep.
The review and revival of contemporary tax concessions to support and enable this
sector and their local communities requires a much needed review, it has been over
two decades since remote area allowances have been looked at effectively from an
economic development perspective. See Attachment.
In addition, this sector needs to be targeted for increased technological training and
development in order to reduce the cost drivers in agriculture. In addition this
development would see a ‘front line’ of agricultural services to the sector and provide
opportunities for future jobs. Many properties are large scale, both local and foreign
owned and provide opportunity for domestic and international markets.
Oil and Gas
The growth in our Shire has been long influenced by gas and oil development in the
Cooper Basin. This area is one of the largest and most significant inland sources of
oil and gas in Australia and has sustained significant development since the 1970’s.
There is continuing development today and reserves capable of support energy
supply for the next 5 decades. In addition there is also mineral capability in the
Eromanga Basic stretching north which offer future development opportunities for the
resource and technology sectors.
This sector and our regional opportunities should continue to be exploited and
transitioned into evolving green industries. These resources are essential to
underpinning our national energy availability.
We believe that there is a way to bring it all together by Meshing the NEM!

Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

4.2 Renewable Energy Opportunity
Queensland is the second biggest user of energy in the National Electricity Market
and unlike SA has poor wind power resources. Queensland does have excellent
solar power resource however the lower quality solar resources in North Queensland
are being developed in preference to the very high quality PV resources in Western
Queensland. Western Queensland PV is better as there are many more sunny days
due to the absence of cloud cover (which can be a frequent occurrence in tropical
North Queensland, and we don’t have cyclones that add to the construction cost of
North Queensland PV and suitable land is much cheaper in SW Queensland. There
is also a growing risk for Southern Queensland if all the large scale renewables are
developed in North Queensland – making South East Queensland, where most of
the electricity is needed, very vulnerable.
The Bulloo Shire has excellent PV capacity, existing gas and geothermal resources.
Council believes that developing solar PV in south western Queensland instead of
north Queensland, this area could become a powerhouse and generate electricity to
resolve peak load issues in Brisbane and the Gold and Sunshine coast cities that
now occurs around 5pm to 7pm. This could lead to not only a better future but a
significantly different and prosperous one.
Meshing the NEM
The Finkel Power System security and Electricity Market Review was a result of the
emerging issues in both supply and pricing of Electricity. The fundamental problem
is that both SA and Queensland are on the extremity of the NEM with only a single
interconnector to the rest of the NEM. We believe that constructing an electricity grid
(through the market) from Bulli Creek in South-eastern Queensland to Davernport in
South Australia via the south western area of Queensland, following the existing oil
and gas corridors via Thargomindah to Innamincka through to Adelaide, could be
achieved.
This option has the capability to ‘open up’ central Australia for the generation of low
cost, high quality renewable electricity – it meshes the NEM across the country and
by strengthening the South Australian and Queensland grids has the potential to
ensure stronger reliability and lower wholesale electricity prices across the National
Electricity Market.
Of note, a well-placed renewable hub(s) connected to the new interconnector and
located alongside the new transmission line would create better alignment of
economic incentives, through renewable zones, to boost development and
deployment of energy based industries in Western Queensland stimulating regional
development. The development would also significantly reduce current high
electricity costs in Western Queensland that are based on inefficient small scale
diesel generation and empower consumers to shrink bills as well as attracting new
industry through the plentiful supply of reliable, clean electricity in the Western
Queensland region.
A grid with the advantages of simplified land tenure, should not be ignored; the south
west of Queensland and North Eastern South Australia support very low populations
and is primarily grazing country or national park capable of running transmission
Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

grids with minimal land tenure issues. Innovations in transmissions technology could
reduce the traditional costs to this type of infrastructure by as much as 50% making it
a viable solution for the market place. This would ensure this concept is both green
and well demonstrated, capable of ‘meshing the existing grid’ to fortify all energy
transmission across eastern and central Australia, thus future proofing transition
infrastructure and renewable development well into the 21st century.

4.3 Economic Enablers as part of strategy development
Council is also adopting an economic development strategy to consolidate and build
growth. The focus is on actions that can be achieved over the next 5 years. The
Strategy addresses the range of issues, challenges and opportunities for sustainable
economic development in the region that have been determined through an
extensive process of targeted research, consultation, engagement and analysis.
Bulloo Prosperity will be led by Bulloo Shire Council in partnership with the
Queensland Government, Commonwealth Government, regional development
bodies such as the South West Regional Economic Development board (SWRED),
business and industry and other supporting partners across the region.
The strategy focuses on the ‘enablers’ of economic development by identifying and
articulating the enablers and attributes which support the region’s economic
development such as critical infrastructure, community services and facilities, local
and regional planning frameworks and partnerships. The aim is to influence the
potential of the region and its appeal as a place to visit, to invest in and to work and
live.
4.4 Ready and Waiting Population Policy and strategies
Outback Queensland represents some 60% of the state with only 2% of the
population. For the Bulloo, the 2016 Census saw a 30% decline in population due to
the downturn in the mining sector. Council, in conjunction with all layers of
Government needs to address this decline and review its policies and programs to
ensure that positive action can occur. We believe that population migration and
immigration offers an obvious opportunity for regional and remote Australia.
Whilst we acknowledge the growing prominence of Australia’s cities, we also note
that these populations are growing even faster than trends predict creating bigger
problems especially in relation to infrastructure and service requirements. In reality,
whilst these cities are attracting increased migration and immigration at record
numbers, they are poorly placed to do so. (Q and Q Population Debate 2018)
Alternatively, if 100,000 Australians/immigrants moved to regional cities and towns
this has the potential to save as much as $50 billion over a 30 year period in reduced
congestion and increased consumption (RAI 2016). In addition, initiatives such as
the Evocities demonstrate that their recent 2017/18 campaign evidenced a 345%
increase in responses across the 7 NSW regional towns in relation to interest by
Australians to move to a regional city. (Evocities submission 2018).
We believe that rural and remote towns everywhere would also embrace new
settlement. Success is relative, and on a much smaller scale has the potential to
prove a ‘butterfly effect for the reversal of decline. Recent press has highlighted the
Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109

success of migration to towns such as Nhill, Pyramid Hill, Mingoola, Biloela,
Dalwallinu, Hamilton, Rupanyup, and Nobby. (RAI Media Release 2018).
If we match the decline with the need, this surely provides a great opportunity for
small and larger rural/ remote towns to reduce inequity through a solution based
process. We believe all of Local Government would welcome these new migrants
simultaneously providing a solution capable of re-generating local economies
through growth rather than requests of increased subsidies due to decreasing
population numbers.
Councils Target
Accordingly, Thargomindah in the Bulloo Shire is just such an opportunity. We have
set ourselves a target of 3 families per year. Over 5 years this would significantly
improve our local economy adding potentially 15 families and their children to the
Shire, immediately boosting education, facility and recreational utilisation and health
returns.
Contrary to the popular opinion about the lack of jobs in the Outback, the Bulloo
Shire has skilled and non-skilled jobs as well as infrastructure such as housing. We
also can provide low cost facilities access (pool) a free gymnasium, free swimming
lessons, free afterschool and holiday programs and better educational outcomes
through increased teaching levels. Our Shire can offer opportunity to get ahead as
well as a significant amount of social infrastructure to ensure quality of life.
As a local Council we would happily welcome settlement by Australians, enterprise
workers as well as refugees and humanitarian entrants. It would only take a small
numbers of settlers to significantly change our outlook and reverse current decline
(BSC Interview 2WEB 2018). Simply put we are ready and waiting.
Yours faithfully,

John Ferguson
Mayor
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Bibliography
J. Archer, Regional Australia Institute, Great Small Cities,
http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/2016/10/economic-growth-requiresconnected-regional-cities-notfactory-floors, Accessed 23 May 2018
Ferguson, J, 2018. Radio Interviews W Harrison 2 WEB April, May 2018.
Mack, K on behalf of Evocities group, 2018 Inquiry into indicators of, impact of
Regional Inequality Submission, May 2018
Q and A Abc TV, April 2018 Debate about populations
Regional Australia Institute, Deal or No Deal – Bringing Small Cities into the
National Cities Agenda, April 2016, p.6
Regional Australia Institute Success of Small Towns, Media Release, May
2018

Submission Senate Economics References Committee Indicators of, and Impact of Regional
Inequality in Australia May 2018
9

