Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

Submission into the
Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council
17 February 2017

Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2
Electricity generation ...................................................................................................................... 2
Generation .................................................................................................................................. 2
Opportunity..................................................................................................................................... 3
Information about Key Gas Infrastructure in South Western Queensland .................................... 6
Gas transmission ......................................................................................................................... 6
South West Queensland Pipeline ............................................................................................... 7
Gas distribution ............................................................................................................................... 8
References ...................................................................................................................................... 9

Page 1 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

Introduction
Electricity generation
Fossil fuels still drive 86% of Australia’s electricity supply with about 73% from coal and 13%
from gas.

Open electricity generation map of QUEENSLAND
Generation
Our submission recognizes that there a number of concerns for Queensland as: • Queensland currently only has a renewable mix of 4.5% Queensland State targets of gas
are expected to be 18% by 2020. Currently sitting at 13%, targets at 50% are only 5
years away.
• Queensland is somewhat isolated and although generators can export
from QUEENSLAND, NSW and Victorian Generators can only rarely export to Queensland because of the very limited northwards interconnector capacity.
• Whilst the economy is slow with demand and energy forecast growth relatively flat, projections still indicate growth per annum over the next 10 years due to LNG production.
• Queensland gas generation is declining as the gas available for generation is siphoned
off to CSG.
• Whilst utility scale solar is being built in North Queensland, it is still inefficient compared
with the untapped very high intensity solar PV resources available in Bulloo Shire which
cannot be developed because of the unavailability of a suitable transmission line to
Western Queensland. Gas is still required to fill the gap leading to price spikes during
the middle of the day. This is expected to continue in the short term.
• The manufacturing sector is by far the biggest user of energy at 27% with households
25%, transport 15% and mining 13%; if industry and populations are expected to grow
Page 2 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

•

then this trend will continue. Indeed if new industry is to be developed power stability is
critical.
However, wholesale electricity prices in Queensland have been running around 30%
higher than in NSW and Victoria due to the restrictions on the northernly transmission
limit on the interconnection between NSW and Queensland

Transmission
•

Queensland as a tropical and sub-tropical clime has a greater frequency of severe storm
and flooding events therefore synchronous supply is a critical issue for disaster preparedness and business continuity for the State.

•

Queensland due to its size, and the very limited northwards capacity of the existing interconnector connecting Queensland to the other states, rarely rely on electricity supply
from the other States

•

Queensland has a large geographic distance when compared to States such as SA and
Victoria so transmission is already problematic between North Queensland and Southern Queensland.

•

The new solar PV power stations recently announced for development in Queensland
are most located in Northern Queensland around 1,000kms from Southern Queensland
and the electricity must be transmitted along a long thin transmission network with high
transmission losses.

•

This resembles the situation in South Australia, where electricity is transmitted a similar
distance from Victorian Power stations to South Australia over a long transmission connection, that last September tripped blacking out all of South Australia.

•

Not all Shire council areas are supplied by grid connected electricity with at least 11
communities, including Bulloo Shire outside the NEM, and having its own high cost and
sometimes unreliable diesel generation.

•

If we are to continue to meet climate change targets, Australia must move to much
higher levels of renewable generation.

•

optimum mixes must be realistically achievable

Opportunity
Queensland is the second biggest user of energy in the National Electricity Market and unlike SA
has poor wind power resources. Queensland does have excellent solar power resource however the lower quality solar resources in North Queensland are being developed in preference to
the very high quality PV resources in Western Queensland. Western Queensland PV is better as
there are many more sunny days due to the absence of cloud cover (which can be a frequent
occurrence in tropical North Queensland, and we don’t have cyclones that add to the construction cost of North Queensland PV and suitable land is much cheaper in SW Queensland. There is
also a growing risk for Southern Queensland if all the large scale renewables are developed in
North Queensland – making South Queensland where most of the electricity is needed very
Page 3 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

vulnerable to similar events, so indeed the SA blackout is ‘the wakeup call’ for Southern
Queensland.
The Bulloo Shire sees that Australias transition to renewable energy, together with the growing
transmission risks for South Queensland is a growing power system security risk for Queensland
and an opportunity for South Western Queensland.
South Western Queensland and particularly Bulloo Shire could become a renewable powerhouse for Southern Queensland given its incredible good solar PV resources, existing and future
gas resources, and geothermal energy resources. Another benefit of developing solar PV in
western Queensland instead of north Queensland is that the sun continues to shine and generate electricity, when it has already set in S-E Queensland. PV located in western Queensland
could continue to generate electricity supplying the peak load in Brisbane and the Gold and
Sunshine coast cities that now occurs around 5pm to 7pm.
The emerging problem in South Queensland is a great opportunity for the development of a
new renewable generation hub in Western Queensland, provided a suitable transmission interconnector is built to connect the SW Queensland region to the NEM.
Meshing the NEM
The SA blackout in September 2016 (and more recent SA blackouts) together with the high
wholesale electricity prices in SA and Queensland are the reasons that COAG established the
Finkel Power System security and Electricity Market Review. The fundamental problem is that
both SA and Queensland are on the extremity of the NEM with only a single interconnector to
the rest of the NEM. This security risks and high prices could be solved for both SA and Queensland by MESHING the NEM – that is building a new interconnector across Central Australia to
connect SA to Queensland. This would create a secure MESH of interconnectors for all mainland states Queensland, NSW, Vic, SA – putting Queensland and SA on an equal footing with
NSW and Vic.
It would also solve South Queenslands growing security issues and the new interconnector
would provide another source of power into South Queensland. The new interconnector could
be constructed through Bulloo Shire in western Queensland enabling the development of a new
renewable energy hub to service both Southern Queensland and South Australia,
Ride sharing with Oil and Gas to mesh the grid
This submission emphasizes the importance of the energy sector to the national economy and
that linkages should be seen at the National level rather than the State level. Reform that does
not disrupt the market, can play a part in both supporting incentives and better policy to ensure
that a national approach is taken to energy management and pricing.
The Bulloo Shire Council currently advises that residents located in the south west of Queensland are paying well above the average price for energy both from a business and residential
Page 4 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

perspective. The South West of Queensland is a critical reservoir of oil and gas resources; thus
current prices in conjunction with a scarcity of options for infrastructure is placing a significant
burden on both new and existing industry in our area.
This submission proposes support for an electricity grid that runs from Bulli Creek in Southeastern Queensland to Davernport in South Australia via the south western area of Queensland. This grid constructed through an open market process could easily follow the south west
corridor already in place for gas and oil via Thargomindah to Innamincka through to Adelaide
where access roads and tracks are already constructed and maintained. This option has the capability to ‘open up’ central Australia for the generation of low cost, high quality renewable
electricity and by MESHING the NEM and strengthening the South Australian and Queensland
grids would ensure stronger reliability as well as lower wholesale electricity prices across the
National Electricity Market.
A well placed renewable hub(s) connected to the new interconnector and located alongside
the new transmission line would create better alignment of economic incentives, through renewable zones, to boost development and deployment of energy based industries in Western
Queensland stimulating regional development. These zones should be based on a range of criteria, including:
•
•
•
•
•

economic benefit to customers
energy resource potential
infrastructure availability and access stakeholder and local authority support
environmental suitability
potential opportunity for deferral or replacement of network investment projects

The development would also significantly reduce current high electricity costs in Western
Queensland that are based on inefficient small scale diesel generation and empower consumers
to shrink bills as well as attracting new industry through the plentiful supply of reliable, clean
electricity in the Western Queensland region.
While Queensland is rich in a diverse range of renewable energy resources – geothermal, biomass, wind and hydro – the focus to date has primarily been on solar, with Queensland having
one of the highest levels of solar concentration in the world. This makes Western Queensland a
logical choice for solar energy developers keen to take advantage of this rapidly growing market
sector and it should be leveraged to secure capability and connectivity across Australia.
A grid with the advantages of simplified land tenure, should not be ignored; the south west of
Queensland and North Eastern South Australia support very low populations and is primarily
grazing country or national park capable of running transmission grids with minimal land tenure
issues. Innovations in transmissions technology could reduce the traditional costs to this type of
infrastructure by as much as 50% making it a viable solution for the market place. This would
ensure this concept is both green and well demonstrated, capable of ‘meshing the existing grid’
Page 5 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

to fortify all energy transmission across eastern and central Australia, thus future proofing transition infrastructure and renewable development well into the 21st century.
The forming of a secure mesh for the NEMs interconnectors through Central Australia will ensure a secure, sustainable and lower cost national electricity market harmonized across State
boundaries. If this grid was supported by renewable economic zones, the potential to introduce
new industry and jobs to regional Australia would be not only be possible, it would be likely.
From a national perspective though, Federal endorsement of climate change targets set by the
2015 Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change are
focused on energy efficiency improvements and low emission investment and practices along
with the phasing out of very potent synthetic greenhouses gasses, however there is no clear
plan of how this is going to be achieved (DEE 2016)
It is really critical now that Governments use the language of harmony to bring people together
to work collaboratively to make the system work both as a system for effective electricity
transmission across the entire NEM, in and around all States. This is as essential to Australia
economic development, society’s wellbeing and commitment for strong domestic and international action on climate change (DEE 2016).
Information about Key Gas Infrastructure in South Western Queensland
Both natural gas and coal seam gas are found in Queensland in commercial quantities. Natural
gas or conventional gas is drawn from fields covering the Cooper and Eromanga basins in the
south and south-west of Queensland with most production being completed at Ballera and
Roma. CSG explorers are exploring and discovering CSG deposits in both the Surat and Bowen
Basins. Construction of gas fired power stations is occurring in a number of areas around the
state including Swanbank, Townsville, Dalby and Roma.
Gas transmission
Gas is transported from the field to market by pipelines. There are 5 major natural gas pipelines
in Queensland, the:
•

South West Queensland Pipeline (SWQP), running from Ballera to Wallumbilla (Roma)
(937km)

•

Carpentaria Gas Pipeline (CGP), running from Ballera to Mt Isa (840km)

•

Roma to Brisbane Pipeline (RBP), running from Wallumbilla (Roma) to Brisbane (438km)

•

Queensland Gas Pipeline (QGP), running from Wallumbilla (Roma) to Gladstone and
Rockhampton (627km)

•

North Queensland Gas Pipeline (NQGP), running from Moranbah to Townsville (392km).

These pipelines directly service large industrial customers and gas-fired generators. They also
provide gas for localised distribution networks in and around Queensland cities and major regional centres. In addition, the Queensland-South Australia-New South Wales pipeline link (QSN
Page 6 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

Link) between Ballera and Moomba was commissioned in 2009 and links the first 4 pipelines
above to pipeline systems in the interconnected eastern gas market (New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory).
South West Queensland Pipeline
The South West Queensland Pipeline (SWQP) (also known as the Ballera to Wallumbilla Natural
Gas Pipeline or the Ballera to Wallumbilla Pipeline System) is a transmission pipeline owned
and operated by APA Group. In December 2012, APA acquired the SWQP when it completed its
takeover of Hastings Diversified Utilities Fund (the investment fund behind Epic Energy). The
SWQP was one of several pipelines across Australia owned by Epic Energy.
The SWQP consists of two pipelines that were constructed at different times. The original
SWQP was constructed in 1996. From this time until 2008, it transported gas in a west to east
direction from the Ballera gas processing plant in south west Queensland to the Wallumbilla
supply hub. Gas was sourced from conventional gas fields in the Queensland sector of the
Cooper basin. The original SWQP is 755 km in length.
At Ballera, there is a connection to the Carpentaria Gas Pipeline which supplies gas to Mount
Isa. Also, along the route of the original SWQP there are connections to pipelines that supply
gas to power stations at Roma and Barcaldine (Cheepie to Barcaldine Gas Pipeline).
In 2008, the QSN Link a 182 km extension to the original SWQP, was constructed. The QSN Link
provides a link between Ballera (in Queensland) and Moomba (in South Australia). At Moomba,
it connects to the Moomba to Sydney Pipeline (MSP) and the Moomba to Adelaide Pipeline System (MAPS).
With the construction of the QSN Link and the expansion of the original SWQP (both the original SWQP and the QSN Link are fully looped, that is, duplicated) gas can now be transported
between the Wallumbilla supply hub and Moomba. In 2014, the integrated SWQP and QSN Link
were reconfigured as a bidirectional pipeline. This allows gas to be supplied from conventional
and coal seam gas fields in the Bowen-Surat basin in Queensland to markets in NSW and South
Australia via Wallumbilla, the SWQP, MSP or MAPS respectively. In addition, gas from the
Cooper basin gas fields can flow east along the pipeline to Wallumbilla and then onto markets
in Brisbane and Gladstone
The SWQP is not subject to regulation under the NGL.
(AEMC 2016)

Page 7 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

Map: Courtesy of Santos 2017
Gas distribution
There are natural gas distribution networks serviced by pipelines in South East Queensland
(Brisbane, Gold Coast, Sunshine Coast, Ipswich and Toowoomba); Oakey, Roma, Dalby, Bundaberg, Maryborough, Hervey Bay, Gladstone, Rockhampton, Grantham, Coominya and Moura.
(DEE Queensland 2016).

Page 8 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 109 - Attachment 2

Submission into the Independent Review of the National Electricity Market
Bulloo Shire Council authored by E Marks

References
1.
Origin Energy 2014, State of energy market report 2014, Australian Energy Regulator,
Canberra, ACT. Website accessed 2 October 2016
https://www.originenergy.com.au/blog/about-energy/energy-in-australia.html
2.

Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) 2013, Australian Energy Resource Assessment 2013, ARENA. Website accessed 2 October 2016
https://www.originenergy.com.au/blog/about-energy/energy-in-australia.html

3.

Renew Economy 2016. Energy market is telling Queensland Government to wake up.
Website accessed 2 October 2016. http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/energy-market-istelling-queensland-government-to-wake-up-57654

4.

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) 2015. A historic global
climate agreement was agreed at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP 21) in Paris on
30 November to 12 December 2015. Referred to as the Paris Agreement 2015. Website
accessed 1 October 2016.
http://unfccc.int/files/home/application/pdf/paris_agreement.pdf
https://www.environment.gov.au/climate-change/publications/factsheet-australias2030-climate-change-target

5.

Carraro, C and M Tavonie, T Longden and G Marangoni, The Optimal Energy Mix in Power
Generation and the Contribution from Natural Gas in Reducing Carbon Emissions to 2030
and Beyond University of Venice, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei (FEEM) and EuroMediterranean Centre on Climate Change (CMCC) ** FEEM and CMCC Italy Prepared for
The Harvard Project on Climate Agreements. Online resource accessed 2 October 2016.
http://belfercenter.hks.harvard.edu/files/dp63_carraro-et-al.pdf

6.

DEE 2016 Website www.dee.Queensland.gov.au. Accessed 2 October 2016

Page 9 of 9

