Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

Submis sion to the Senate Economic References Committee
Inquiry into

Regional Inequality in Australia

28 May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

CONTENTS
Page
About RDAA
Contact for RDAA

2
2

Executive Summary

3

Recommendations

4

Background

5

Key Issues

6

Response to Terms of Reference

10

Conclusion

14

Endnotes

15

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

ABOUT RDAA
RDAA is the peak national body representing the interests of doctors
working in rural and remote areas and the patients and communities they
serve.
RDAA’s vision for rural and remote communities is simple – excellent
medical care.
This means high quality health services that are:
•

patient-centred

•

continuous

•

comprehensive

•

collaborative

•

coordinated

•

cohesive, and

•

accessible

and are provided by a GP-led team of doctors and other health professionals
who have the necessary training and skills to meet the needs of their
communities.

CONTACT FOR RDAA
Peta Rutherford
Chief Executive Officer
Rural Doctors Association of Australia

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Australia is, by world standards, a prosperous nation with a healthy, welleducated population. Yet there are a number of population groups within
this country that are not as well off as others. Increasing inequality of
income and wealth and a widening gap between the top and bottom of the
socio-economic scale is evident1.
This has significant impact in rural and remote areas where people are
already experiencing higher rates of poverty2 and significantly poorer health
outcomes than those who live in metropolitan areas. Many social
determinants markers – including for education, employment and housing –
indicate significant inequalities between regions. Inequalities being
experienced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people though well
recognised, are persistent and reflected in unacceptably high rates of many
preventable conditions and mortality gaps between Indigenous and other
Australians.
RDAA believes that:
•

The health of individuals, families, communities and populations is
both an indicator of and contributor to regional inequality in
Australia.

•

Inequitable allocation of health funding and resources exacerbates
inequality in these areas.

The inequities and inequalities in health that exist between more urban and
rural and remote people is antithetical to the national characteristics valued
by Australians and must be a central concern of any examination of regional
inequality. The good health and wellbeing of rural and remote Australians
will also be critical to achieving and sustaining regional growth.
The role of human capital in determining economic growth is particularly
important in discussions about regional inequality and has significant
implications for the health system. Governments recognise that they have a
duty of care to provide health care services to the population and often
espouse the need to provide these services close to home. However, ad hoc
investment at all levels of government – a function of Australia’s tiered
health funding system and political expediency – fails to translate rhetoric
into reality. Bipartisan strategic and operative planning underpinned by
adequate levels of investment is essential to redress inequities and reduce
regional inequalities.
3

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

RECOMMENDATIONS
RDAA makes the following policy recommendations to help address
inequality between regions:
•

recognise that addressing health and wellbeing inequities and
inequalities is central to addressing regional inequality more broadly

•

analyse access to health services in Australia using the Modified
Monash Model remoteness scale to more accurately reflect
community access

•

provide better access to health services in rural and remote areas by:
o

investing in models of care which provide critical services in
local communities, including expanding renal dialysis
services

o

allocating sufficient funding to develop the National Rural
Generalist Pathway to ensure rural and remote people have
access to doctors with the advanced skills they need

o

working with rural doctors to identify effective support
mechanisms for general practices as providers of health
services, employers and contributors to local economies

o

developing specific agreements on rural hospital funding
through the Council of Australian Governments national
health agreements process directed to maintaining rural
hospital services and providing incentives for increasing
services

o

institute funding models that support sustainable health
services and health workforce retention

•

further develop cross-government and cross-departmental
strategies to improve health outcomes, particularly in relation to
child health

•

develop a transport policy which aligns with health and education
needs.

4

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

BACKGROUND
Australia’s regional, rural and remote areas comprise a diverse range of
communities with economies based on activities such as agriculture,
forestry, fishing/aquaculture, mining and tourism that make a significant
contribution to the nation’s wealth and prosperity3. However, this
contribution is not recognised through equitable spending on health in these
areas. The National Rural Health Alliance estimates a rural and remote
primary health care deficit of over $2 billion each year4.
This inequitable allocation of funds is of significant concern. People living in
Australia’s rural and remote regions experience high rates of poverty5.
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) mapping reveals large swathes of
rural and remote Australia are in the most disadvantaged categories with the
ten most disadvantaged having populations of under 3700 usual residents
within the Local Government Area6.
Rural and remote Australians experiencing these disadvantages often
interact with many different areas within the health and human services
systems, most often in disconnected ways. Lack of access to services is a
pervasive problem, which becomes more difficult with the degree of
remoteness and contributes to generally poorer health outcomes as
evidenced by higher rates of mortality and morbidity and risky health
behaviours. Risks of occupational accidents and injury are also higher7.
Although the prevalence of many mental illnesses is similar across Australia,
suicide and self-harm rates are much higher (especially for males) in rural
and remote areas8. Accessing all types of health professionals becomes
increasingly more difficult with remoteness, contributing to these poorer
health outcomes. Recruitment and retention of an appropriately qualified
health workforce continues to be difficult in many areas resulting in a
maldistribution of health professionals.

5

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

KEY ISSUES
Clearly, the health profile of rural and remote Australia is indicative of
regional inequality. Health disparities compromise the capacity of many
rural and remote Australians to engage in social and economic activities,
including those necessary to generate income and wealth, and limit the
benefits that human capital can provide. Poor health, therefore, is also a
contributor to other regional inequalities.
The key issue impacting on this situation is access. Access – to health care
and to other services and opportunities – is a critical factor in determining
the desirability of a location as a place to visit, to live, to work, to bring up
children or to retire to. Access to high quality health care, including to a
general practitioner (GP), affects the appeal of a rural and remote location as
a place to live regardless of age or life stage.
The availability of birthing services in rural areas provides an example of the
impacts that access to health care, or lack thereof, can have on rural people
and communities as they underpin many activities in these communities.
People who choose to live in rural and remote communities have rational
expectations about what constitutes reasonable access to health care. For
many women access to birthing services strongly influences their
judgements about the quality of health services in a community.
All hospital services should be prepared for an imminent birth. As
communities increase in size (and with consideration given to the distance to
the next birthing service) rural hospitals may increase their capacity to
provide birthing services from low-risk deliveries staffed by midwives and
Rural Generalists, to birthing services which have 24-hour emergency and
caesarean capability staffed by midwives and Rural Generalists with
advanced skills in obstetrics and/or anaesthetics.
However, birthing services are not routinely provided in all rural hospitals.
Those that do not provide these regular services are deemed to have
significant risks by expectant mothers and women intending to have
children. Ensuring that these services exist in local hospitals also ensures that
there are doctors trained in obstetrics and midwives in the town who are
able to provide the continuum of antenatal, perinatal and postnatal care.
The closure of a birthing facility requires women (and their newborns) to
travel for appointments. It can increase a two-hour trip to a hospital birthing
centre to have their baby to five or more hours for some women. They may
6

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

also be, and often are, asked to relocate to a town or city with a birthing
facility two to four weeks (and sometimes more) prior to their due date. This
places considerable financial and other imposts on expectant mothers, their
partners and families. Lack of access to birthing services can force women to
permanently relocate to other towns to start or add to their families
contributing to the social and economic decline of rural communities.
It also means that midwives and the GP obstetrician will likely leave the
community to go where they can use their training, further stripping rural
communities of skills, opportunities for employment of support staff and
income derived by other local businesses.
Rural and remote doctors have also identified a range of other factors that
impact on whether they will move to a rural location. They are all indicative
of regional inequality and are likely to be of similar concern for others. They
include:
•

employment issues

Employment opportunities are fundamental to thriving rural and remote
communities. Young people are more likely to stay in, or return to, a
community that can offer job prospects. Others are more likely to be
attracted to and retained in communities with sufficient opportunities to
meet not only their needs but also those of their spouse/partner.
Employment considerations, however, are not just about job vacancies. Lack
of access to personal and professional support, to continuing professional
development and to career progression opportunities can also detract from
the desirability of a location.
•

lack of access to high quality childcare, schooling and other
educational opportunities

Access to high quality childcare, schooling and other educational
opportunities is limited or non-existent in many rural and remote
communities. Access to childcare can be very difficult for health care workers
who, through moving to a rural or remote location, have reduced family and
friend support. They may require childcare outside business hours due to the
24/7 nature of many health care services.
Schooling also poses challenges, particularly during the secondary school
years where the availability and choice of subjects and extra-curricular
7

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

activities to suit individual children, as well as educational standards, are
important. Sending children to boarding school becomes the only feasible
option but can impact on family relationships and is expensive.
Lack of access to vocational and tertiary education opportunities means that
young people often move to where these opportunities exist. This impacts
negatively on population retention and the economic viability and social
vibrancy of rural and remote communities. This contributes to continuing
inequality.
•

poor transport links

The “tyranny of distance” is a well-recognised challenge for those who live in
rural and remote communities. Poor access to quality fresh food at an
affordable price is an ongoing issue, as is the need to travel for health
services. These challenges can be addressed to minimise the negative
impacts of regional inequalities.
There are examples, such as renal dialysis, where new models of service
delivery allow for services to be delivered in rural and remote communities.
Without this local facility, rural and remote renal patients must endure
travelling to a distant facility three times a week, which has a significant
impact on their physical and mental health. This is only feasible if patients
have access to private transport. Reliance on public transport and/or air
travel significantly increases financial costs and time away from home,
family and community. Air travel may not be possible at all if there is no
airport within a reasonable distance.
For rural and remote communities to be vibrant and thriving they must be
underpinned by better access to health services, employment opportunities,
childcare and educational opportunities and transport. Without this people
will either choose not to live in these communities or to relocate to meet
their personal and professional welfare needs and those of their families
further increasing the impacts of regional inequality on those that stay.
Investment by all levels of government will be necessary to avoid this.
Regional development can reduce levels of inequality in health in rural and
remote Australia through strategic and operative planning. Plans must be
mindful of the impact social, cultural and environmental determinants of
health have on people and of the complex interrelationship of health
services with other social and community services. They must acknowledge
8

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

the role of general practices within this context and be supported by
adequate levels of investment.
Investment in health and social services adequate to redress health
inequities and reduce inequality continues to be an issue for those delivering
these services, as are funding arrangements that are commonly based on
relatively short-term cycles. Such arrangements are deleterious to the
provision of health care and social services in rural and remote areas leading
to uncertainty and workforce instability. This greatly increases the risk of
service closure as it is far more difficult to recruit and retain qualified
personnel in these areas. Health funding mechanisms that recognise the
unique challenges that exist in rural and remote communities are essential
for efficient and effective planning.
Rural and remote general practices are the cornerstone of rural and remote
health, with GPs providing and coordinating team-based, comprehensive,
continuous and longitudinal care, which is based around the needs of
patients, families and communities. They deliver pre-conception to palliative
aged care and acute and emergency services in a range of settings, including
private practices, hospitals, aged care and outreach centres. They are also
small businesses, providing employment within the local area, supporting
other local businesses and services and contributing to the highly regarded
health system that is essential to strong tourism sector.
Investing in rural and remote general practices would be beneficial both to
redress regional health inequities and inequalities and to support local
economies.

9

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

RESPONSE TO TERMS OF
REFERENCE
•

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels

Governments have a duty of care to provide reasonable access to health
services to the population: a responsibility that cannot be abrogated
because of budgetary pressures. Spending on health should not be
contracted simply because it is expedient to do so in fiscally challenging
times. While value for money must be a consideration for policy makers and
funding providers, health expenditure must be seen as an investment in the
future prosperity of the nation, not as a cost to be minimised. Governments’
health expenditure must be set at realistic levels to achieve desired health
outcomes, not only to support the good health and wellbeing of Australians
but also to underpin the nation’s economy and growth.
•

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government
policies

As demonstrated by Australia’s tobacco control successes, the best health
outcomes are derived from co-ordinated national, state/territory and local
activities9 but there are few readily available examples of effective coordination in Australia.
There are, however, many examples of siloed approaches and fragmented
services. Australia’s mental health system is one such example: Our “mental
health system”—which implies a planned, unitary whole—is instead a
collection of often uncoordinated services introduced on an often ad hoc basis,
with no clarity of roles and responsibilities or strategic approach that is
reflected in practice10.
That health system funding in Australia is tiered with the federal
government largely responsible for primary care and state/territory
governments for hospitals is challenging for the rural and remote health
sector and contributes to these siloed approaches to issues that would be
best addressed holistically, through longer term, evidence-based, wellconsidered strategic and proactive plans that provide the flexibility for local
circumstances to influence action. In many areas it creates “artificial”
divisions that are not always well understood by people in the community.
For example, a rural patient may seek emergency treatment at the local
hospital only to find that it is provided by their regular GP who is a Visiting
Medical Officer at the hospital.
The span, scope, complexity and circumstances of rural and remote health
are often not fully appreciated by policy makers. Policy and funding

10

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

decisions tend to be metro-centric in origin and application and do not
adequately recognise that rural and remote health is a complex and
interdependent web of local and further afield health practitioners and
services funded and/or provided by all levels of government, a range of nongovernment agencies and organisations, private corporations and individual
health professionals operating as small businesses. Rural and remote health
services are different to those provide in more urban areas
The two issues of tiered funding and metro-centric approaches are
exemplified by South Australia where rural hospitals were on average being
funded 30% less than tertiary hospitals for the same procedure at the time
when the new Royal Adelaide Hospital – which ran significantly over budget
and time to opening – continued to receive additional funding. Funding for
rural hospitals is a jurisdictional responsibility. It is of grave concern that it is
more equitably distributed in some States/Territories than others.
•

regional development policies

Regional development planning offers the opportunity to identify common
ground and unify approaches. It is critical that policymakers learn from
previous experience to avoid issues such as the endemic efforts to shift costs
that are a function of Australia’s tiered health system funding model.
Addressing disparities in health and education must be central to regional
development planning as highlighted by the Regional Australia Institute in
its submission to the Select Committee on Regional Development and
Decentralisation: The first goal is to more effectively develop our rural and
remote heartlands. This involves delivering locally tailored services that can
narrow the long term divides in health and education outcomes and ensuring
that we have the local population and skills necessary to sustainably develop
our vast natural resource endowment11.
Regional development policies must:
o

recognise that the good health and wellbeing of rural and
remote Australians is essential to personal, community and
national social and economic growth

o

acknowledge that the provision of health services is critical to
underpin development outside capital cities, and deliver those
services
11

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

o

be cognizant of possible health impacts and ensure appropriate
risk mitigation strategies are in place. For example, the closure
of a business that employs large numbers of people has a
detrimental effect on the mental health of those losing a job in
an area where finding new employment is difficult. Lack of
mental health services in rural and remote areas means that
rural doctors bear the burden of increased health needs

o

support multi-disciplinary approaches across health and other
sectors to provide high quality care and safety for patients and
professionals.

•

infrastructure

Improving the technological, physical and capital infrastructure in rural and
remote areas is critical to reduce regional inequalities, redress inequities and
promote regional growth. The health, social and community services and
education sectors would all benefit from investment to improve access to
broadband, upgrade facilities and provide or replace old equipment. A rural
hospital should not have to run fundraising campaigns to buy new
ultrasound equipment for its birthing centre.
The re-establishment of an infrastructure grants program and innovative
options for funding and better utilising rural health infrastructure should be
explored.
Reliable and fast data streaming is becoming more necessity than ‘nice to
have’ in our rapidly evolving technological world. It is needed to take
advantage of innovations in health monitoring and telemedicine and to
improve access to training, continuing professional development and
support for professionals, including doctors.
Improved transport infrastructure in rural and remote, especially airports,
will:
o

support recruitment and retention of workforces, including for
health

o

support emergency services, including retrieval of patients

o

improve accessibility should patients need to travel for
treatment.
12

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

•

education; building human capital; enhancing local workforce
skills; employment arrangements

Ensuring the availability of appropriately qualified workforces to deliver the
locally tailored services that are required to redress the inequities in health
and education outcomes is challenging in many rural and remote areas.
While there is the potential for regional, rural and remote communities to
make greater contributions to economic growth and prosperity of the
nation, population loss to urban centres is a significant concern12.
Providing locally accessible opportunities for secondary and higher
education, including continuing professional development (CPD) and
pathways to enhance the knowledge, skills and experience of individuals will
be necessary to stem this loss and to attract new residents.
Employment arrangements can be a critical factor in recruiting and retaining
qualified personnel. For example, rural and remote Australia is facing the
challenge of matching community expectations with that of doctors.
Communities are now having to recognise that younger doctors have
different mobility requirements and are unlikely to make lifelong
commitments to a community. Employment models must consider these
requirements, the impact of changing life circumstances, possible
limitations to career progression due to location, education and
employment opportunities for spouses and access to childcare among other
things.
•

decentralisation policies

While decentralisation policies may impact on government employment and
expenditure in regions, any associated increase in population in regional
centres and the smaller rural towns that surround them will also place an
additional burden on existing infrastructure and health services. If
decentralisation policies are introduced they must be underpinned by
investment in health, social services, education, housing and transport.
Workforce needs must also be considered.
Other considerations are the loss of economies of scale and the risk that the
greater costs will be passed on to consumers; the impact of virtualisation of
services and the need for strong digital infrastructure, and the risk of greater
compartmentalisation of views based on regions selected (How will services
appear to other localities?).

13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

CONCLUSION
Clearly addressing regional inequality is complex and, in relation to rural and
remote areas, issues of equity must be a key consideration.
Without good health the capacity of rural and remote people to effectively
participate in economic and social activity, and to contribute to the
attainment of regional development goals, will be compromised. Without
improvements in regional capacity to provide improved infrastructure, offer
educational and employment opportunities, build human capital and
increase workforce participation redressing health inequities will be
problematic.
Addressing regional inequality will be vital to the sustainable development
of Australia’s heartland. It will require:
•

agreement across political divides

•

a multi-faceted, holistic approach to regional policy development
that seeks to redress inequities

•

acknowledgement of the importance of health and its social,
cultural and environmental determinants within this context, and

•

strategic and operative health plans with clear and attainable goals.

14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 112

ENDNOTES
1

Figure A.14 shows that people living in the capital cities of Perth, Sydney, Brisbane,
and to a lesser extent Melbourne, are more likely to be in the top 20% and less likely to
be in the people living in the capital cities of Perth, Sydney, Brisbane, and to a lesser
extent Melbourne, are more likely to be in the top 20% and less likely to be in the
bottom 20%. Figure A.15 shows that people living outside capital cities tend to be
found more at the bottom of the income distribution than at the top, except in Western
Australia.
Australian Council of Social Services (2015). Inequality in Australia. Sydney: ACOSS.
p50.
https://www.acoss.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2015/06/Inequality_in_Australia_FINAL.pdf Viewed 23 May 2018.
2
National Rural Health Alliance (2017). Fact Sheet: Poverty in Rural & Remote
Australia. http://ruralhealth.org.au/sites/default/files/publications/nrha-factsheetpovertynov2017.pdf Viewed 23 May 2018.
3
For example, the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources indicates that the
food industry … consistently accounts for around 20 per cent of domestic
manufacturing sales and service income. The overwhelming majority of food sold in
Australia is grown and supplied by Australian farmers. We are able to export more
than half of our agricultural produce, while more than 90 per cent of fresh fruit and
vegetables, meat, milk and eggs sold in supermarkets are domestically produced.
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/food
4
http://ruralhealth.org.au/sites/default/files/publications/fact-sheet-27-election2016-13may-2016.pdf Viewed 23 May 2018.
5
http://ruralhealth.org.au/sites/default/files/publications/nrha-factsheetpovertynov2017.pdf Viewed 23 May 2018.
6
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) is a product developed by the ABS that
ranks areas in Australia according to relative socio-economic advantage and
disadvantage. The indexes are based on information from the five-yearly Census.
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/2033.0.55.001~2016
~Media%20Release~Census%20shows%20our%20most%20advantaged%20&%20di
sadvantaged%20areas%20(Media%20Release)~25 Viewed 23 May 2018.
7
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2016. Australia’s health 2016. Australia’s
health series no. 15. Cat. no. AUS 199. Canberra: AIHW.
https://www.aihw.gov.au/getmedia/6d6c9331-5abf-49ca-827b-e1df177ab0d3/ah16-511-rural-remote-health.pdf.aspx
8
Bishop, L., Ransom, A., Laverty, M., & Gale, L. (2017). Mental health in remote and
rural communities. Canberra: Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia. p15.
9
http://www.quitnow.gov.au/internet/anpha/publishing.nsf/Content/submission-coa
Viewed 23 May 2018.
10
National Mental Health Commission, 2014: The National Review of Mental Health
Programmes and Services. Sydney: NMHC. p6.
11
Available at http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/our-current-work/policy/
Viewed 23 May 2018.
12
Australian Bureau of Statistics mapping of POPULATION CHANGE BY
SA2, Australia - 2016-17 shows a decline or relatively static population growth across
most rural and remote regions. The combined population of Greater Capital Cities
increased by1.9% between 30 June 2016 and 30 June 2017, accounting for 81% of
Australia’s total population growth.
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/3218.0. Viewed 28 May 2018.

15

