Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Committee Secretary
Senate Economics References Committee
Department of the Senate
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA

Submission to: Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.

Dear Sir/Madam
I would like to express my thanks for the invitation to make a submission to the Senate Economics
References Committee on the Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia.
The topic of regional inequality in Australia raises a number of complex issues that are not easily
resolved by a short and succinct submission.
Additionally, the broad scope of the terms of reference further complicates this important subject.
Rather than address each point in turn, I will structure the submission into four key areas:
1. Introductory comments.
2. Areas of inequality concerns with possible solutions.
3. Brief response to the committee’s interest areas.
4. Summary.

1. Introductory Comments
Emerald, with a population of 13,532 (2016 Census), is a modern regional services hub located 300
km west of Rockhampton in Queensland and is the largest inland centre of the Central Highlands
region.
Emerald is located at the heart of Queensland and is the business, primary production and logistics
gateway between northern and western Queensland and southern regions. Emerald also acts as the
Central business District for the Central Highlands Regional Council, which comprises of 53,680 km²
and 13 unique communities including: Arcadia Valley; Bauhinia; Blackwater; Bluff; Capella; Comet;
Dingo; Duaringa; Emerald; Gemfields; Rolleston; Springsure; Tieri.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

In 2017, the Central Highlands Development Corporation (CHDC) in partnership with the Central
Highlands Regional Council commissioned a Central Highlands Economic Masterplan.
The plan states:
‘The population services for the region are all relatively under-developed compared to the state
average. The employment proportions for these sectors are under-represented and many
social indicators, such as life expectancy, school completion and access to internet connections
are significantly lower than the state average. However, this is not atypical of inland, regional
communities and there are many opportunities in the short-term to greatly improve these
measures. Investments in digital infrastructure, tele-health, specialised education pathways and
targeted community investment by industry are considerations for the region and would
optimise the population services foundation of the region.’
This is a typical reflection of the situation experienced by regional communities. Reinforcing that
services are generally ‘under-developed’.
For example, only 4.6 general practitioner services were provided per resident in the Central
Highlands region even during the 2010 mining ‘boom’, compared to 5.5 per resident in Brisbane.
Many social indicators are significantly lower than the state average—life expectancy in the Central
Highlands region is 71 years compared to the state average of 80 years.
While I recognise there has been a whole-of-government upturn in regional focus, regional
communities have a substantial way to go, not only reach parity on service provision, but to be able to
offer a quality of life that attracts and retains families.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

In my view, current government policy has only symbolically included regional areas and many
tangible outcomes are yet to be fully realised.
Specifically, policy intended: to populate regional areas, or more broadly the decentralising of
metropolitan areas; to adequately support diverse regional industries that significantly contribute to
the national economy, including agriculture, horticulture and mining; and to generally focus on
liveability throughout regional Australia.
The level of service provision to regional Australia has been far from optimal. The best one could say
about service provision in regional Australia is that genuine attempts have been made to
proportionately provide a comparative level of service based almost exclusively on population
numbers.
Unfortunately, these attempts simply do not factor the tyranny of distance, among many other
factors, that regional communities have to overcome to access services.
As a result, local authorities, in combination with community organisations are forced to collaborate
and resolve service provision issues with bespoke regional approaches which other levels of
government are either unable or unwilling to support.
This places extreme pressure on already marginalised regional communities and, consequently, many
people choose to relocate from regional areas to metropolitan areas to seek better access to a variety
of services.
By way of empirical example, in 2015, Monash University published the findings of an examination
into whether adult use of mental health services subsidised by Medicare varied by measures of
socioeconomic and geographic disadvantage.
The conclusions were, to say the least, alarming:
‘Our results highlight important socioeconomic and geographical disparities associated with the use of
Better Access and related Medicare services. This can inform Australia's policy makers about these
priority gaps and help to stimulate targeted strategies both nationally and regionally that work
towards the universal and equitable delivery of mental health care for all Australians (Meadows et al.,
2015).’
This data is not new, but unfortunately it is consistent. Challenges most often cited for people
needing services include: transport, distance, cost, or inadequate services in the outer regional or
remote areas.
The General Social Survey 2006, while 12 years old, reinforced that people living in metropolitan cities
are less likely to have problems accessing a range of services than those living in other areas. The data
also indicated that this was true irrespective of family type (Baxter, Hayes & Grey., 2011).
A pragmatic understanding to shift the paradigm is needed to engender confidence in the legitimacy
of the government’s intent to recognise regional Australia.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

2. Inequality Concerns
These are some highlights, but far from a comprehensive analysis of the regional inequalities
experienced within the Central Highlands and are presented in no particular order.
Topic

Federal Government City Deals

Comments

City Deals are a new approach in Australia, bringing together the three levels of
government, the community and private enterprise to create place-based
partnerships. With the aim to align the planning, investment and governance
necessary to accelerate growth and job creation, stimulate urban renewal and
drive economic reforms. City Deals focus on securing the future prosperity and
liveability of our cities.
The uniqueness and diversity of cities across Australia means that the best
outcomes will be achieved by tailoring the approach to designing and delivering
City Deals.
The first three City Deals in Townsville (External link), Launceston (External link) and
Western Sydney (External link) have been developed over recent years and
included a broad range of stakeholders and experience as well as lessons from
overseas.

Concern

Notwithstanding the importance of the first three City Deal that have been
progressed, there is no representation of regional communities in these deals and
the contribution these regional communities play in driving the national economic
agenda in various industries.

Possible
Solution

Identify a ready-to-go and capable regional area with willing stakeholders, Central
Queensland, which will benefit the wider community from the establishment of a
‘Regional Deal’ (opposed to a ‘City Deal’).

Topic

Diverse Industry Base

Comments

The Central Highlands region is underpinned by a diverse and robust industry base
including:


A globally competitive coal mining industry.



Traditionally robust and resilient agricultural and horticulture sectors.



Dynamic small and medium businesses.



A growing tourism market supported by major natural attractions.



Professional and government sectors.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Despite 26.03% of the region’s workforce being employed in mining, the resources
commodity peak and decline did not impact the region to the same degree as other
mining regions.
This was due to the diversity of industries and the stable income and secure
employment provided by government agencies and related occupations that has
cemented the long-term viability and vitality of the region.
Economic resilience is demonstrated by the low levels of fly-In-fly-out workforce
(27.2%) when compared to other mining regions, such as the neighbouring Isaac
local government area, where 51.2% of the workforce choose to live in other
locations and commute.
Concern

The ability to continue supporting this diverse industry base without ongoing policy
support.

Possible
Solution

Ensure bi-partisan support for policy that reflects the need for longevity in
industries that support regional communities and, where possible, have this policy
support across industry sectors
And further, consideration of the development of nationwide policy similar to the
Queensland Strong and Sustainable Resource Communities Act, 2017 that responds
to the needs of regional and remote communities adversely impacted by fly-in-flyout mining operations.

Topic

Connectivity

Comments

Despite high speed broadband infrastructure, fibre network, wireless, ADSL and
digital services in Emerald that enhance access to social services, education, health
care and service business operations, this is not the case for other regional
communities.
Additionally, many homes and business, even within Emerald, are unable to
connect to the NBN due to infrastructure in the ground.
In 2017, CHDC in partnership with council commissioned a Digital Audit and Action
Plan to understand the gaps in connectivity throughout the region.
This plan identified a number of deficiencies across the region an action plan was
developed in response.
Possible solution: Where regional areas have invested resources towards
identifying infrastructure and technological gaps digital economy participation,
provide funding to remediate these gaps and connect regional areas into the digital
and technological ecosystem.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Concern

That the 2018-2019 Budget has removed the blackspot funding programme and
regional communities will continue to be disconnected from the digital economy.
Without the adequate level of resources, limited progress will be made against any
action plan to address the digital divide and regional communities will continue to
fall behind the advanced and rapid pace of the digital economy.

Possible
Solution

Reinstate funding for the mobile blackspot programme.

Topic

Transport

Comments

Access to transport provides opportunities for inclusion, access to services, and an
opportunity for prosperity
Quality of life is dependent on many things of varying importance, and access to all
of these things is critical to a well-connected and supportive community.
Some key issues to this challenge include low demand, albeit a high level of
importance, and a potentially high cost due to distances covered.
As a result, the Central Highlands has no public or community transport services
that connect the region.
Despite this reduced level of service to the community, Emerald is a major air
services hub. There are more than fifty Brisbane to Emerald direct return passenger
air services per week provided by Qantaslink and Virgin Australia that transport
more than 200,000 passengers per annum.
This provides excellent connectivity considering only two carriers reach all
metropolitan centres on the east coast, including Canberra.
The region is serviced by the Central Queensland rail line linking Emerald to Alpha,
Barcaldine, Winton, Gladstone, Longreach, Mackay and Rockhampton.
In terms of road transport, Emerald is conveniently located at the intersection of
the Capricorn Highway and Gregory Highway.

Concern

That adequate access to cost-effective transportation remains problematic for
regional communities.

Possible
Solution

Collaborate through a public private partnership approach to implement transport
solutions to regional and remote communities to enhance connectedness and
liveability of regional communities in Australia.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Topic

Housing availability

Comments

Modern, comfortable, high-quality, affordable accommodation options are
available in Emerald appropriate to house a skilled workforce.
A variety of accommodation is available to suit all lifestyles ranging from urban
units to rural acreage.
The median house price is currently $242,500 and $156,250 for units. Weekly
median advertised rent for houses is $280, and $200 for units. Current rental
vacancies total 164 premises in Emerald and 291 in the local government area.

Concern

Severe fluctuations in prices for rental accommodation and housing prices have
occurred due to the resurgence of resource industries.
Ongoing challenges exist for people that are not directly connected with the
resource industry to maintain a consistent quality of life and meet increasing
financial commitments.

Possible
Solution

Strengthen existing or develop new policies to support living expenses in regional
communities that are adversely impacted through increased financial
commitments in resource rich communities.

Topic

Liveability

Comments

Activity around the mining boom has resulted in little to no difference in regional
population, and it remains a safe and positive place to live and work.
Population figures show a level of consistency from 28,715 in (CH LGA 2011
Census) to 27,999 (CH LGA 2016 Census). There is a range of well-equipped and
modern facilities for people of all ages, including sporting clubs and venues, art
galleries, cinemas, shopping centres and recreational spaces.
There is a mix of state school options that provide educational and employment
opportunities for students and teachers. Extensive tertiary options are available,
including the Central Queensland University Emerald campus and the Emerald
Agricultural College, plus a large number of registered training organisations.
Quality childcare options are also available.

Concern

To provide ongoing embellishments that enhance regional liveability.

Possible
Solution

Develop and implement a similar model of funding to the Works for Queensland
program (Queensland Government) that supports job-creating projects and is
allocated funding (based on population and unemployment rates), not competitive.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Topic

Health

Comments

The availability and continuity of health services remains a significant concern for
the region.
The region has established healthcare infrastructure, including a GP Super Clinic,
and a 36-bed public hospital providing acute inpatient, accident and emergency,
pharmacy, outpatient services and radiology in addition to surgical, paediatric and
maternity services.

Concern

Training and professional development of medical staff is insufficient in regional
and remote areas.

Possible
Solution

An Australian Government investment in regional and rural training for medical,
clinical allied health and nursing practitioners is required—designed and delivered
through a public private partnership.
Training programs should link regions of Australia together for health and wellbeing
service delivery. Virtual training facilities and resources for rural and regional health
providers are critical to the survival of health services.
Seed funding for infrastructure and training resources will resolve this training
deficiency.

Topic

Youth Services

Comments

Almost exclusively, local government provides youth services to the region.
Historically, council was supported by the resource industry that subsidised youth
development staff wages in communities where a particular resource company had
commercial and community interests.
Unlike the metropolitan areas with a plethora of accessible activities, the
opportunities and options for youth to be engaged in pro-social activities is a
complex and problematic challenge for regional communities.
This year, council endorsed its first strategic plan for youth that, to simply meet the
demand across the region, requires two youth officers in addition to the one
already engaged, to meet its outcomes.

Concern

Limited pro-social activities for youth could potentially result in anti-social
behaviour and disengagement from formal education systems.

Possible
Solution

Where practical, support through funding or resource allocation, youth
development services that facilitate youth development activities.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Topic

Youth leaving regional communities

Comments

It is generally recognised as a necessity for youth in regional areas that, when they
reach a certain age, either at the completion of school or commencement of
university, they will relocate from regional areas to metropolitan cities in search of
more prosperous education and job opportunities.
This scenario does not factor in the limitations of families with low incomes unable
to support this move.
The challenge for regional communities is to, either have in place some attraction
for the local youth who have relocated to return or, have a consistent level of
attraction from outside the regional area (preferably a metropolitan city) to
incentivise individuals and families to relocate to the region.
We know that only 25% of youth return to their home regional communities.
Without either of the aforementioned attractors it is inevitable that each regional
community will eventually become extinct through natural attrition.
The most viable and achievable solution to this challenge is to stabilise
employment and increase jobs in the region.

Concern

Without appropriate policy addressing incentives for regional living, it will remain
difficult to attract and retain individuals and families to regional communities.

Possible
Solution

To strengthen and develop policy that provide incentives for individuals and
families relocating to regional and remote communities.

Topic

Aged Care

Comments

Australia has an ageing population (15% in 2016 were 65 years or older) and by
2055 this proportion will increase to 22.9%.
This presents many challenges: it increases demand for primary health, aged care
services and long-term care; requires a larger and better-trained workforce; and
intensifies the need for built environments and infrastructure to be age-friendly.
It also has implications for the nature and quality of services and will affect
economic output and governments’ budget.
When it is time for someone to move into residential aged care, the Australian
Government subsidises aged-care homes where people contribute to the cost of
care if they can afford to. Access to residential aged care in remote and very
remote communities is extremely limited.
Private providers are not found in locations where business models are marginally
sustainable.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

The concept of consumer choice decreases and remoteness increases. Data
strongly suggests that as people in these communities age they move to urban
locations for access to health and aged care services.
In doing so, they are removed from family and familiar surroundings causing
extreme stress.
Based on the Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia (ARIA), different models
of care are required for the various geographical segments, so a coordinated
approach is required to change the current system that may appear to be
inequitable.
Concern

A deficiency in funding and recognition of aged-care in regional areas and ageing
in-place service provision is fracturing vulnerable regional communities.

Possible
Solution

Collaborate to develop targeted models of aged-care that respond to the needs of
regional and rural communities in partnership with all three levels of government
and the industry sector.

Topic

Telecommunications and the digital divide

Comments

Mobile phone coverage is a major issue in regional and remote Australia, with
more than 10,000 sites nominated under the Mobile Black Spot Programme.
These mobile black spots impact business and industry, road users and access to
health, education and other critical government services.
Communication is a basic necessity and inadequate mobile phone coverage is
therefore a significant issue, particularly for those living, working and travelling in
regional and remote Australia.
This should be prioritised to improve consistency of services and close the gap for
residents, businesses and visitors.
The Mobile Black Spot Programme is an Australian Government initiative to
improve mobile phone coverage and competition in regional and remote Australia.
Together, rounds 1 and 2 are delivering almost $600 million of new investment
towards 765 new base stations, 86,300 square kilometres of new and upgraded
handheld coverage, 202,300 square kilometres of new external antenna coverage,
and more than 7,600 kilometres of new coverage to major transport routes.
The funding commitment to rounds 1 and 2 was supported by $287 million from
the mobile network operators: Optus ($36.5 million), Telstra ($229 million) and
Vodafone ($21.5 million) with a further $141.2 million co-contributed by six state
governments. An additional $2.2 million is being provided by local governments,
businesses and community organisations.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Sites are determined based on a competitive selection process, with mobile
network operators to propose sites where they would build new or upgraded base
stations to address identified black spots nominated by the public.
Eligible members of Parliament, those representing an area of which less than 50%
is ineligible for this funding, and which are not designated as ‘Inner Metropolitan’,
can nominate three priority locations via this process.
Councils can also nominate priority sites and elect to provide incentives for the
development of new infrastructure.
Only 716 new base stations are being funded during round 2, out of over 10,000
nominated sites despite the funding committed.
Further funding is required to address this significant infrastructure problem.
Additionally, the government’s focus on the digital economy has further alienated
regional areas by not considering regional communities’ contribution.
Concern

That the 2018-2019 Federal Government Budget has removed the blackspot
funding programme and regional communities will remain disconnected from the
digital economy. This is the exact opposite of what should be occurring given we
know the accelerated pace and advancement in technology.

Possible
Solution

Reinstate funding for the mobile blackspot programme.

Topic

Banking Services

Comments

The recent closure of the ANZ banks in Springsure and Moura means there is no
banking services between Moura and Emerald (312 km).
The government’s response to multiple appeals for intervention in this crisis is the
position that: ‘the Treasury cannot intervene a business decision.’
The solution is not isolated to forcing banking services to stay open. It is having a
genuine interest in regional communities’ reliance on traditional banking services
and, most importantly, appropriately supporting digital telecommunications
infrastructure.

Concern

No solution, support or substitute for the loss of physical banking services had been
forthcoming from the federal government.
Accordingly, regional communities cannot participate in online banking and
maintain business operations while disconnected from the digital economy.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

Possible
Solution

Establish a taskforce to examine this issue and provide recommendations to
resolve the gap between regional community connectivity and the rapidly
transforming digital economy.

Topic

Funding models not adequate for regional communities that include specialised
services and providers within the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) that
support patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) to prevent local families from
having to relocate.

Comments

Thanks to the NDIS pricing review released in March 2018, some relief looks to be a
welcomed outcome.
Of importance to the Central Highlands and other regional areas is the
administrative overheads for providers transitioning; the increase in cost of service
delivery for complex needs; and unsustainable travel expenses for providers and
participants.
One major challenge is the ability to attract and retain qualified, competent and
willing staff to deliver the services required in regional areas through the NDIS.
In the Central Highlands, many families have had to relocate to receive the support
needed for family members ASD.

Concern

That vulnerable people are being under-serviced through the NDIS and, as a result,
are relocating from regional communities to access better allied health services.

Possible
Solution

Continue to review the implementation of the NDIS for gaps in service delivery and
expedite any identified solutions and service provision responses.

3. Brief response to the committee’s five interest areas.
a. Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and unequal
outcomes in non-metropolitan areas.
The SEFIA rating for the Central Highlands is 1033 – lower than Brisbane (1048) but higher than
Queensland (1002).
Therefore, the Central Highlands scored higher than Queensland in terms of socio-economic
advantage but is disadvantaged compared to the major capital city, which is a continuing theme.
While some statistically comparative strong points for this region exist, including incomes being high
(weekly income is around $860 compared to $660 for Qld), house prices and rental prices are can be
considered low (during a slower period in the resources sector), and unemployment is low.
Of great concern, there is also a lack of mental health practitioners to provide acute community
services and anecdotal evidence suggests that most crisis support services are being coordinated from
larger regional centres with extensive and thinly-resourced footprints.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

VET higher education is also on par with Queensland. As a percentage of workforce, the number of
trainees and apprentices and VET students are all with almost negligible percentage points comparing
the two regions.
That said, the number of residents with any higher education qualifications is significantly lower than
Queensland (31% to 39% respectively).
Until recently, higher level education in a broad range of disciplines has not been available or
delivered locally, outside the core industries of mining, resources and agricultural training. This
continues to be addressed through CQ University’s commitment to diversification of subject areas
and increased local delivery, particularly around health services.
b. Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and
other areas.
The Central Highlands local government area covers a vast area of 53,680 square kilometres that
encompasses the regional communities of Arcadia Valley, Bauhinia, Blackwater, Bluff, Capella, Comet,
Dingo, Duaringa, Emerald, Rolleston, Sapphire Gemfields, Springsure and Tieri.
The region has a total of 3,144 businesses; more than 60% (1,984) do not employ staff.
Businesses classed as ‘small’ (19 or fewer employees) comprise 97.5% of the total and there are none
classified as ‘large’ (200 or more employees).
The largest employers are mining, agriculture and education. The largest number of businesses are
operating in the agricultural sector. (ABS 2017)
The metropolitan areas in the Fitzroy electoral area have a greater capacity for innovation because of
the concentration of people, resources and businesses, and greater economic diversity.
People in the Central Highlands are less connected because of: the distance between centres; issues
with mobile coverage, internet access and quality; and limited access to high quality broadband for
online transactions.
The region has low rates of employment in technology-related industries (3.2%) and Information
Communication & Technology and electronics (0.4%) when compared with national employment
figures (Regional Institute Australia, 2018).
Inland of the urban fringe, the regions provide industry and service hubs for the resources and
agricultural industries.
These are strong value-creating industries, but are exposed to global commodity price fluctuations
and weather vagaries.
The most significant employment is ‘task and process’ roles that are being progressively automated.
These regions need innovation and entrepreneurial incentive that focus on regional comparative
advantages to encourage local economic diversity.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

c. Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper?
Decentralisation policies that give people incentive to relocate and encourage liveability in regional
areas will demonstrate a shift in thinking.
There is a direct link between high levels of entrepreneurship, strong small businesses, and the
vibrancy and sustainability of local communities.
The number and capability of medium-sized enterprises must grow to offer employment and foster
emerging entrepreneurs.
The Central Highlands is prepared to build on the strengths of its communities; to create and extend
support systems already proudly owned because they meet the specific regional needs; and to link
into any network outside the region at any level.
d. Policy settings that could help address inequality between regions.
The Central Highlands is delivering food, fibre and energy to power, not only our regional economy,
but also the Queensland and Australian economies.
Central Highlands Regional Council has identified growth strategies that need policy and investment
support from governments and commercial partners to build on its commitment to the region.
The Central Highlands Economic Management Plan 2017-2022 action plan will guide the region’s
economic development activities for the next five years to achieve a 30-year vision for the region's
economy and local community.
The Central Highlands Accelerate Agribusiness (CHAA) initiative drives growth and promotion for
businesses producing agricultural and food products, processing and other value-adding services in
the region.
There is a growing recognition that, while significant economic and productivity growth has occurred
within individual agribusiness, the next big opportunities to grow wealth will be gained in areas such
as regional branding, manufacturing and processing, and supply chain infrastructure, which require
cooperation and collaboration across farms, sectors and the value chain.
CHAA facilitates collaboration between businesses, industry, research institutions and all levels of
government to stimulate investment in the agribusiness sector focussing on five key strategies:


Production Excellence: Cultivate and promote agribusiness capability to fully utilise resources
and sustainably grow the value of production.



Connected Competitive Supply Chains: Strengthening the Central Highland region’s role as
the gateway and hub to northern and western Queensland.



Revered Regional Brand(s): Build a revered region by promoting its premium products and
services.



Ready for Business: Grow investment and supply-chain ready businesses within the Central
Highlands with national and global market potential.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113



Fearless Invention: Foster knowledge-intensive and high-tech industries and communities
within the Central Highlands to power future economic opportunity.

CHDC also leads the Advance Queensland Innovation Program across Central Queensland.
The Central Highlands Regional Council has previously indicated its strong support for Australian
Government agency decentralisation.
The Central Highlands provides numerous excellent examples of successful government
decentralisation and it would offer its location as a strong candidate to provide these services.


Queensland Government Department of Transport and Main Roads’ state-wide call centre is
located in Emerald.



Emerald is a central location for the Queensland Government departments of Agriculture and
Fisheries (beef, grains, cotton), the Environmental Protection Agency (mining) and Natural
Resource Management (vegetation), Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority, and State
Valuation Services for the Central Queensland region extending to the Queensland border.



Emerald is a regional base for government-owned corporation SunWater’s operations.



The Cotton Research Development Corporation has a national research manager located in
Emerald.



BHP is an example of best practice corporate decentralisation; the office servicing its Bowen
Basin assets is located in Emerald, and is supported by a Local-Buy Foundation also located in
Emerald.

The council is open to negotiation on a variety of incentives and support for agencies considering
corporate decentralisation.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

4. Summary
A bi-partisan and consistent approach to policy that is relevant; appropriately responsive to regional
challenges; and collaborative will progress industry, economic and community outcomes for regional
Australia.
Serious consideration must be given to the planning, preparation and implementation of a ‘regional
deal’ proposal for Central Queensland that the Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development
and Cities suggests will ‘ … accelerate job creation, stimulate urban renewal and drive economic
reforms.’
Despite the Australian Government’s intention to deliver ‘city deals’ throughout Australia, no deal has
been progressed that includes regional communities.
The statistics and community sentiment both support a renewed approach to regional communities
throughout Australia. It’s time to get on with the job.

Yours sincerely,

Daniel Fletcher | General Manager Communities
Central Highlands Regional Council
Address | PO Box 21 | EMERALD QLD 4720
P 1300 242 686 D
F 1300 242 687
W www.centralhighlands.qld.gov.au
Follow Us www.facebook.com/CHRCouncil

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 113

References
Meadows, G. N., Enticott, J. J., Inder, B., Russell, G. M., Gurr, R., 2015. Better access to mental health
care and the failure of the Medicare principle of universality. Retrieved from
https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2015/202/4/better-access-mental-health-care-and-failuremedicare-principle-universality
Baxter, J., Hayes, A., & Gray, M. (2011). Families in regional, rural and remote Australia (Facts Sheet).
Melbourne: Australian Institute of Family Studies.

