Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission to the
Senate Economics References
Committee

Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact
on, regional inequality in Australia

Local Government Association of Queensland – May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Contents
1.

Introduction ................................................................................................................. 4

2.

Executive summary and recommended strategies ...................................................... 5
2.1. Recognise local government as a partner with other levels of government in regional
development .......................................................................................................... 5
2.2. Establish reliable, allocation-based fiscal transfers to local government to enable
service delivery to communities and to support regional economies ...................... 6
2.3. Provide for remote and regional Indigenous community needs .............................. 7
2.4. Manage resource community needs in partnership with communities .................... 8
2.5. Adopt agreed regional indicators and analysis methods to enable a common
approach to policy development across levels of government ................................ 9
2.6. Support investment in human capital, including education and training .................. 9
2.7. Develop strategies for population retention and attraction .................................... 10
2.8. Drive innovation through collaboration and partnerships ...................................... 11
2.9. Promote new digital economies, resource sharing and open data ........................ 11
2.10. Introduce revised tax concessions, subsidies and other incentives for individuals
and families .......................................................................................................... 12

3.

Inquiry Terms of Reference ....................................................................................... 13

4.

The significance of the local government sector to improving regional equality through
supporting economic activity ..................................................................................... 14

5.

Analysis of factors affecting Queensland councils by LGAQ segment ....................... 15

6.

Defining, measuring and addressing regional inequality............................................ 16

7.

Comments on the Terms of Reference Topics .......................................................... 16
7.1. Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels................................. 16
7.2. Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies ................ 18
7.3. Regional development policies ............................................................................. 18
7.4. Infrastructure ........................................................................................................ 21
7.5. Education ............................................................................................................. 21
7.6. Building human capital ......................................................................................... 22
7.7. Enhancing local workforce skills ........................................................................... 22
7.8. Employment arrangements .................................................................................. 23
7.9. Decentralisation policies ...................................................................................... 23
7.10. Innovation ............................................................................................................ 23
7.11. Manufacturing ...................................................................................................... 23
7.12. Other matters – Indigenous communities ............................................................. 24
7.13. Other matters – Housing ...................................................................................... 25

Page 1 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.14. Other matters –Tourism infrastructure .................................................................. 25
7.15. Other matters – Regional air services and long-distance passenger services ...... 26
7.16. Other matters – Population and estimation methods ............................................ 26
APPENDIX 1 - Recent related LGAQ and ROC submissions ............................................. 27
APPENDIX 2 - Internal & external controls impacting council financial sustainability ......... 28
APPENDIX 3 - Recent papers on Regional Inequality in Australia ..................................... 30
1.

ABS SEIFA 2016 (released 27 March 2018) ........................................................ 30

2.

Productivity Commission Transitioning Regional Economies, Dec 2017 .............. 30

3.

ALGA State of the Regions 2017-18 – Pillars of Regional Growth........................ 32

4.

CEDA How unequal? Insights on inequality April 2018 ........................................ 32

5.

Centre for Labour Market Research, University of Canberra, Australia Regional
Inequality and the Trade Cycle, Michael Corliss and Phil Lewis ........................... 33

6.

Grattan Institute Working Paper No. 2017-8, Regional patterns of Australia’s
economy and population August 2017 ................................................................. 33

7.

Local Government National Report 2014-15 (February 2017) - on the operations of
the Local Government (Financial Assistance) Act 1995 (Cth)............................... 33

8.

ACOSS Inequality in Australia 2015 (first edition of Inequality in Australia part of the
‘Poverty and Inequality in Australia’ series) .......................................................... 34

9.

The Australia Institute - Income and wealth inequality in Australia - Policy Brief No.
64 July 2014 (Richardson and Denniss) ............................................................... 34

10.

ACELG & LGAQ Community Wellbeing Indicators - Measures for local government
- May 2013 ........................................................................................................... 34

Page 2 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

References:
ABS 2033.0.55.001 Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) 2016
ABS 2033.0.55.001 Technical Paper - Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas
(SEIFA) 2016
ABS 3218.0 Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2016-17
ABS 5512.0 Government Finance Statistics, Australia
ACELG & LGAQ Community Wellbeing Indicators - Measures for local
government May 2013
AEC Group Environmental Scan of Air Route Service Delivery to Rural,
Regional and Remote Communities (prepared for the LGAQ) February 2018
AEC Group / Orion Consulting (for the LGAQ) Factors Impacting Local
Government Financial Sustainability: A Council Segment Approach 2013
ALGA State of the Regions 2017-18 – Pillars of Regional Growth
CEDA How unequal? Insights on inequality April 2018
Centre for Labour Market Research, University of Canberra, Australia Regional
Inequality and the Trade Cycle, Michael Corliss and Phil Lewis
CSIRO TraNSIT: Unlocking options for efficient logistics infrastructure in
Australian agriculture June 2017, Andrew Higgins,et al.
LGAQ 2017 Digital Productivity Report
LGAQ Queensland Local Government Advocacy Action Plan April 2017
LGAQ submission to the Australian Productivity Commission Public
Infrastructure Inquiry 2014
LGAQ Inquiry into service delivery in remote and discrete Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities Submission - June 2017
LGAQ Inquiry into service delivery in remote and discrete Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities - Response to Daft Report November 2017
LGAQ Policy Statement 2016
LGAQ Submission to the Department of Transport and Main Roads Review of
Long Distance Passenger Services, March 2013.
Lockyer Valley Regional Council – Submission to the Inquiry into Regional
Inequality, 30 April 2018
North West Queensland Regional Organisation of Councils Submission to the
Inquiry into Regional Inequality, 14 May 2018
Pormpuraaw Aboriginal Shire Council - comments on LGAQ consultation draft
submission, May 2018
Productivity Commission Transitioning Regional Economies, December 2017
Queensland Parliamentary Committee – Infrastructure, Planning and Natural
Resources – Local Government Financial Sustainability Inquiry 2017
The Case for Reviewing Income Tax Zone Rebates, NIEIR for the Council of
Mayors Darling Downs and South-West Queensland and RDA - Darling Downs
& SWQ, November 2011
Wide Bay Burnett Regional Organisation of Councils – comments on LGAQ
consultation draft submission, May 2018
Page 3 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

1.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Introduction

The Local Government Association of Queensland (LGAQ) is the peak body for local
government in Queensland. It is a not-for-profit association established solely to serve councils
and their needs. The LGAQ has been advising, supporting and representing local councils
since 1896, allowing them to improve their operations and strengthen relationships with their
communities.
The LGAQ does this by connecting councils to people and places; supporting their drive to
innovate and improve service delivery through smart services and sustainable solutions; and
delivering them the means to achieve community, professional and political excellence.
On behalf of its member councils, the Local Government Association of Queensland is pleased
to provide this submission for the consideration of the Senate Economics Reference
Committee Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality in Australia.
In preparing this submission, the LGAQ called for contributions from all councils and thanks
those councils that provided information. The LGAQ understands that some Queensland
councils and Regional Organisations of Councils (ROCs) have also made submissions. The
LGAQ recommends these submissions to the Senate Committee as they provide valuable
insights based on direct experience in regional communities.
As the Committee will appreciate, the potential scope of this inquiry is very broad. Given the
Inquiry timetable, this submission presents a concise summary of some key issues faced by
regional Queensland communities and their local governments.
The LGAQ has also made other submissions that are relevant to this Inquiry, and links to these
are provided in Appendix 1 for the Committee’s reference; these are:
•
on regional air services - LGAQ submission to the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs
and Transport References Committee Inquiry into the operation, regulation and funding
of air route service delivery to rural, regional and remote communities – February 2018
“Environmental Scan of Air Route Service Delivery to Rural, Regional and Remote
Communities” (prepared by AEC Group for the LGAQ);
•
on fiscal policy reform - LGAQ submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into
Horizontal Fiscal Equalisation, February 2018;
•
on digital economies – the 2017 LGAQ Digital Productivity Report;
•
on remote and regional indigenous communities - LGAQ Response to the Draft report
of the Queensland Productivity Commission Inquiry into service delivery in remote and
discrete Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, November 2017, and the
LGAQ Submission to the Inquiry into service delivery in remote and discrete Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander communities, June 2017;
•
on remote Indigenous community housing - LGAQ submission to the Review of the
National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH) Dec 2016;
•
on long-distance passenger services - LGAQ Submission to the Department of
Transport and Main Roads Review of Long Distance Passenger Services, March 2013;
•
The Case for Reviewing Income Tax Zone Rebates, NIEIR for the Council of Mayors
Darling Downs and South-West Queensland and RDA - Darling Downs & SWQ,
November 2011.
Some recommended approaches, both current practice and new opportunities, are presented
in the Executive Summary. If the Committee requires any clarifications or further information,
please contact Simone Talbot, A/General Manager - Advocate, Local Government Association
of Queensland via email simone_talbot@lgaq.asn.au or telephone 07 3000 2222.

Page 4 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

2. Executive summary and recommended strategies
2.1. Recognise local government as a partner with other levels of government in
regional development
Local government is the level of government closest to the community and is best placed to
understand and respond to the needs of communities at the local and regional level. The
services and facilities provided by councils support the daily experience of the communities
they serve and the performance of regional economies.
In Queensland, 77 local governments (plus Weipa Town Authority) cover the entire land area
of the State. These councils have long-established Regional Organisations of Councils
(ROCs), Regional Roads and Transport Groups, and (in some regions) Queensland Water
Regional Alliances (QWRAP) which operate as formal regional groups to discuss, prioritise
and deliver regionally significant projects.
These collaborative alliances have demonstrated their ability to take regional approaches to
planning, the provision of essential and other public services, and infrastructure.
The Queensland State Government formally recognises the role of local government under
the ‘Partners in Government Agreement’, which is renewed every three years. The Agreement
formalises a set of principles to guide the relationship between the Parties and identifies the
roles and responsibilities of each party. It encourages positive and cooperative relations and
provides a basis to implement other agreements between the Parties, covering specific
services and functions.
The Australian Local Government Association’s 2017-18 State of the Regions report notes the
essential role played by local government in regional economies. The report also notes an
April 2017 Productivity Commission observation, made in its Transitioning Regional
Economies Initial Report, that ‘there is a need for councils to be recognised as a full participant
with the Commonwealth and their state/territory government in the development, funding and
implementation of regional economic development strategies.’
Appropriate inclusion of local government as a partner requires:
•
appropriate legislated authority and autonomy to make decisions at local and regional
levels;
•
appropriate involvement in developing policies and delivering programs;
•
regular review and minimising costs of compliance measures (‘red tape’ reduction); and
•
allocation-based, long-term funding commitments that allow councils to carry out the
planning and delivery of services and facilities for communities and regions.
One Queensland regional council’s submission to this Senate Economics Committee Inquiry
notes that:
“One contributing factor to regional inequality may be poorly integrated government
policy across all levels of government. The Productivity Commission report
indicates that local communities may suffer through poorly targeted regional
development programs. Perhaps such programs at times can be influenced by
political imperatives rather than the need, and capacity, for real change. Regions
should not be “outer regional” in terms of consultation and decision making.
Programs need to be motivated by genuine need, equity and potential for success.”
Lockyer Valley Regional Council submission April 2018

Page 5 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 sets out the principles for a workable, co-operative
partnership with Federal and State Governments, including:
•
State and Federal governments recognise the capacity of local governments to
contribute to State and Nation building, for example, by retaining the Federal Roads to
Recovery funding program;
•
Positive, timely, cooperative, proper and meaningful engagement with and by local
government at the local, regional, State and Federal levels to the development of State
and Federal policy and programs;
•
Rationalisation of the roles and responsibility of the three spheres of government to
improve efficiency and avoid duplication of effort;
•
Access to adequate financial and other resources consistent with fiscal equalisation
objectives and commensurate with local government’s roles and responsibilities;
•
Representation by local government on all appropriate State and national bodies, and
the nomination of those representatives by local governments and their associations;
•
Recognition of local government ahead of non-elected regional representative bodies.

2.2. Establish reliable, allocation-based fiscal transfers to local government to
enable service delivery to communities and to support regional economies
The LGAQ estimates that, adjusting for regularly programmed fiscal transfers, the local
government sector receives 4% of public sector revenue. With this, the local government
sector manages an estimated 25% (by value) of public non-financial assets to provide services
to communities and regions (ABS 5512).
The local government sector could better perform its role, including delivering more equitable
service levels across regions, if it received more allocation-based, long-term funding from
other levels of government.
Over the past two years, the LGAQ has been developing a proposal with the State
Government to undertake a whole-of-government review of grant funding to local government.
The intention of this initiative is to improve grant funding arrangements through:
1.

the consolidation of grant programs into a small number of program streams aligned to
outcomes, with governance and oversight of each program stream comprising relevant
State Government departments and the LGAQ;

2.

grant program arrangements that provide funding certainty to councils, thereby
supporting long-term planning, improved asset management and financial sustainability;
and

3.

recognition that this new model is as an interim step toward a simpler, more efficient
centralised model of grant funding to local government, whereby a single State entity
oversees consolidated grant funding arrangements.

LGAQ made a submission to the Queensland State Government on these opportunities, in
response to which the Queensland Government conducted a review of State grant programs.
The review was undertaken by KPMG and the AEC Group, and provides a comprehensive
assessment of current grant funding arrangements including the scope, principles and
objectives for future arrangements and identification of, and transition to, a new grant model.
The KPMG/AEC report convincingly demonstrated that current grant program arrangements
are not only fragmented and costly, they are failing to deliver best value for money
infrastructure and services to Queensland’s communities.

Page 6 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

The review also found that grant funding arrangements are undermining the ability of councils
to plan for the future and are contributing to the difficulties councils have in managing their
assets and achieving financial sustainability.
In order to assist councils to deliver infrastructure and services that are responsive to
community needs, the LGAQ will refer to the KPMG/AEC report as a platform for reform of
State Government grants to local government.
It is reasonable to assume that the same potential opportunities apply to the Federal
Government’s numerous application-based grant funding programs for local government.
Roads to Recovery provides a model program which provides certainty and significantly
reduces administrative costs. The Roads to Recovery allocation-based funding programme is
widely recognised for its effectiveness in funding the local road network and demonstrates the
success of this model of funding. The certainty provided by this programme allows regional
councils to build capability and the skills of its workforces through the ability to budget for a
continuing program of much-needed works on the regional road network.

2.3. Provide for remote and regional Indigenous community needs
Regional inequality for Indigenous communities is a high priority and requires a concerted,
collaborative effort. The provision of health services, housing, education and training, and the
promotion of local economic and employment opportunities remain important priorities for
these communities.
While the Federal Government recently announced funding to the Northern Territory for
Indigenous community housing, the LGAQ remains concerned over the Federal Government’s
lack of commitment to renew the National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous
Housing, and to include a further three remote Queensland communities with a clear need for
housing support.
The Chief Executive Officer of a remote Indigenous council wanted the Senate Economics
Committee to particularly note that “both State and Australian Governments must stop the
squabbles [and] work for the greater good…” of communities. Edward Natera PSM, CEO
Pormpuraaw Aboriginal Shire Council
The council also wanted to bring the Senate Committee’s attention to the following key issues
affecting opportunities for their community:
•
•

•

•

•

a strong commitment and meaningful action to recognise, protect and conserve
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage;
a genuine commitment and progress to create and develop collaborative partnerships
between the Federal and State Governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
local governments democratically elected by and representative of their communities;
current funding arrangements to help remote councils manage waste in rural, remote
and indigenous communities are too restrictive and don’t provide sufficient flexibility to
enable council to achieve the outcomes it needs for the community;
appropriate housing for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities under a
continuing National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH)
is as an urgent, high priority issue, which needs quick resolution;
a commitment to providing access to flexible funding to improve the liveability of
indigenous council areas if we are to achieve the state government’s stated aims of
developing healthy and happy communities across Queensland. There is considerable
disparity between indigenous and non-indigenous council areas which needs a priority
focus. Pormpuraaw Aboriginal Shire Council

Page 7 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 calls for the full inclusion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander local governments in decisions affecting their communities:
•

•

•
•

•

There should be genuine and collaborative partnerships between the Federal and State
Governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander local governments
democratically elected by, and representative of, their communities to improve their
economic and social well-being.
Local government recognises that the cost of waste management in rural, remote and
indigenous communities is substantial. Special resourcing and support is required for
these councils to assist them to move as close as possible to best practice waste
management having regard to their particular circumstances and needs.
Local government acknowledges and supports the recognition, protection and
conservation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage.
Local government seeks provision of appropriate housing for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities under a continuing National Partnership Agreement on
Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH) that is environmentally appropriate, encourages
home ownership and is cost efficient.
Local government calls on the State and Federal governments to support the
development of arts and culture in regional communities through funding programs such
as Regional Arts Development Fund, the Indigenous Regional Arts Development Fund
and Regional Arts Fund, and that funding for these programs should be maintained at
least in real terms.

2.4. Manage resource community needs in partnership with communities
Queensland’s ‘resource councils’ are located in key mining regions and the demand on
services, facilities and infrastructure is significantly increased through the operation of current
(and proposed) resource projects.
These councils are required to inter-act closely with mining sector stakeholders and share
similar challenges to those experienced in other regional communities in working to balance
the economic opportunities derived from mining activity and the corresponding problems
relating to community well-being and their long-term sustainability.
The LGAQ’s advocacy priorities for these councils are:
•
An adaptive management approach to the impacts and opportunities of resource
projects on regional communities.
•
Recognition and meaningful engagement with councils in the assessment and
management of resource projects.
•
All resource projects to have a Social Impact Management Plan, regularly updated to
reflect contemporary economic and social conditions.
•
Introduction of a framework that assesses cumulative impacts of resource projects
across communities, with identified impacts addressed in project Social Impact
Management Plans.
•
That Social Impact Assessments and project conditions ensure that regional
communities benefit from the construction and operation of resource projects.

Page 8 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

2.5. Adopt agreed regional indicators and analysis methods to enable a
common approach to policy development across levels of government
As outlined in Appendix 3 of this submission, there are numerous approaches to measuring
regional inequality. At a government level, for partnerships to operate effectively there is a
need to consider and adopt an agreed set of indicators and a methodology for assessing
regional inequality and other related issues.
Significant work undertaken to date by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on its SocioEconomic Indexes for Areas may provide a basis for this discussion. Other established
methodologies that convert differences in regional indicators into funding formulae, such as
the work of the Commonwealth Grants Commission (and its State and Territory counter-parts),
should also be considered.
One Regional Organisation of Councils (ROC) emphasised to the LGAQ the importance of
not limiting the design of policy solutions and funding to ‘traditionally’ defined regional types.
This region noted that while it was not characterised as a resources or tourism region, it
nonetheless faced challenges as a regional economy and was concerned that the needs of its
community were sometimes overlooked in the development of programs by Federal and State
governments.
This point indicates that simplistic approaches will not address the needs of all regional
communities, and that a proper assessment of regional indicators and assessment of needs
must underpin proper development of policy and funding solutions. This can only be achieved
by including local governments who best know the issues faced by their communities in the
policy development process.

2.6. Support investment in human capital, including education and training
Education and skills training in regional areas improves the capability and employment
prospects of the local workforce. This contributes to productivity and local economic activity.
Regions that have established industries require a supply of skilled workers, and there are
opportunities for targeted education and training to support these industries into the future.
A number of institutions operate specialist education and training facilities in regional areas,
such as the University of Queensland Gatton Campus. This model could be better supported
expanded into other regions, including to establish ‘centres of excellence and education’.
The LGAQ has commenced a national project, under the Local Government Workforce
Development Group (LGWDG), to identify current and future skill needs of the sector. Local
government is a key training and skills provider in regional areas, and the skill levels of the
local government sector workforce influence service delivery and standards of living.
The Local Government Workforce Development Group (LGWDG) comprises representatives
from each state and territory Local Government Association and provides advice on workforce
matters to the Australian Local Government Association.
The project will identify current and emerging skill needs of local government to better position
the sector for the future. Currently, little is known about the sector’s national employment
profile. The most accessible source of data comes from the Australian Bureau of Statistics
(ABS) Census of Population and Housing, but this is available only every 5 years and whilst it
can highlight trends it does not provide an accurate record of total employment numbers for
the local government sector, under estimating the total number of employees by 13% in 2016.

Page 9 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

The absence of a national profile impacts on the ability of the sector to determine current and
future workforce needs and priorities. It is with this context in mind that the LGWDG has
commissioned this set of reports. These reports are underpinned by data obtained through
the National Local Government Skills Shortage Survey 2017 to which:
•

45 percent of councils across Australia and

•

69 percent of Queensland councils responded.

This Queensland Report forms part of a series of Reports commissioned by the LGWDG which
collectively are expected to provide the evidence base needed to support effective advocacy
at both a state and national level, in regard to workforce development matters. The LGAQ
National Local Government Skills Plan – Current and Future Skills Needs within the Local
Government Sector - Queensland is expected to be released in September 2018.

2.7. Develop strategies for population retention and attraction
Many councils are concerned about declining population numbers and other demographic
trends suggesting a shifting age profile of the population in their region.
The population and demographic profile of a region have direct impacts on the availability of
a workforce and the demand for goods and services. There is a ‘critical mass’ level for a
population, below which the sustainability of the local economy, and the local government, will
be affected.
The retention and attraction of people to a region, as consumers and as a local labour force
supporting local industries, is a fundamental objective for regional development policy. Many
of the measures discussed in specific policy areas will act as attractors for people to continue
to reside in, and hopefully move to, regional areas.
An activated local economy also sustains cultural activity and local arts, and access to these
provide important attractors for both residents and visitors. Programs that support local arts
and culture, and that bring art exhibitions, music and theatre performances to community
venues and ‘masterclasses’ to schools, provide social benefits that can help sustain a
community. Federal and State funding programs that support local arts and culture, and that
allow arts and culture to be further developed and presented in regional areas, are an essential
element of community life.
A number of Federal and State funding formulae for transfers to councils include population
and many regional councils regularly express concerns that there appears to be an issue of
under-enumeration of population figures. Under-enumeration, and consequent under-funding,
affects the ability of councils to provide services.
There is a related discussion of a level of demand for services created by the ‘usual, nonresident population’. Non-resident population demand for goods and services can be
attributed to tourists, including drive tourists, and itinerant workers.
The LGAQ calls for the estimation of population in relation to funding and planning to be
examined to include regularly revised, regional adjustment factors that reflect the actual
demand for public services.

Page 10 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

2.8. Drive innovation through collaboration and partnerships
There are significant potential benefits from pursuing collaborations between government and
research organisations, like the CSIRO and CRC-type units affiliated with universities and
other education and research institutions.
For example, the CSIRO’s TraNSIT agriculture transport model has been used to identify
priority routes for beef cattle and provided an evidence base for coordinated prioritisation and
funding across all levels of government under the Beef Roads program. The TraNSIT project
has been extended to cover a number of livestock, grain and fibre products and will continue
to provide an important evidence base for transport improvements to benefit these industries
and the economy.

2.9. Promote new digital economies, resource sharing and open data
The LGAQ recently released its third Digital Productivity Report, providing an in-depth look at
the changing digital requirements, maturity and capabilities of Queensland local governments.
The Report notes that there is strong awareness across local government of the potential for
information to be deployed to help transform communities. Councils are overwhelmingly in
favour of open data programs, with 75% of councils surveyed reporting that they are either
currently, or are planning to, share data with the community.
Access to reliable, affordable connectivity, both for councils and their communities is required
to maximise the benefits of many digital tools. However, poor access to network infrastructure
continues to have a major impact on connectivity and productivity across a significant
proportion of Queensland. Only 55% of councils reported their community has access to high
quality internet in their local areas, up only 8% (from 47%) when first surveyed in 2013.
This figure is particularly significant as poor internet coverage (66%) and speed (62%),
alongside high costs (59%), were cited as the leading barriers to success for entrepreneurial
and innovative digital businesses.
While the vast majority of councils have the ability to connect, there are growing concerns
about the problems facing communities who are suffering from service issues and delays in
accessing consumer networks, largely resulting from the roll out of the National Broadband
Network (NBN).
A lack of skilled workers is also a growing concern, with 75% of councils agreeing that there
is a skills shortage for the digital economy in Queensland.
As councils move to enterprise cloud-based solutions, communities are being challenged
because of the uncertainty around the availability of new technologies. Indigenous councils
are amongst the most disadvantaged in terms of core and access infrastructure at both the
council and community levels.

Page 11 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

2.10. Introduce revised tax concessions, subsidies and other incentives for
individuals and families
A number of remote and regional councils maintain that tax concessions for remote area
residents, and for small to medium businesses, remain valid mechanisms to encourage
equality through increased regional economic activity.
This is premised on the fact that the costs of living in regional areas are higher due to
transportation costs for people, the transportation cost component in the prices of goods and
services, distance to access services, market size and economies of scale considerations.
The LGAQ notes for the Committee’s reference a paper The Case for Reviewing Income Tax
Zone Rebates, provided for the purposes of the current Inquiry by the Council of Mayors
Darling Downs and South-West Queensland (Nov 2011).
A summary of the findings are presented in the following panel.
There remain three arguments for the continuation and updating of Zone rebates, including
the related social security Remote Area Allowances.
· Support for remote-area economic development. Zone rebates provide partial
compensation for the reduction in the competitiveness of remote-area export industries
which has occurred as an unintended side-effect of the market-determination of the
exchange rate coupled with heavy reliance on monetary policy to counter inflation. Zone
rebates also assist in the provision of local infrastructure and support services in the remote
areas. This infrastructure is important for the export industries, for defence and for the future
of remote indigenous communities. (In discussions of public finance, this is essentially an
economic efficiency argument.)
·Compensation for the higher prices of necessities in the remote areas, particularly food.
This is particularly important for social security recipients. (In discussions of public finance,
this is essentially an ability-to-pay argument.)
·Partial compensation for the costs of accessing government services from the remote areas.
Though the primary responsibility here lies with service providers, the Zone rebates
recognise that remote area residents bear a share of these costs. (In discussions of public
finance, this is essentially a benefit principle argument.)
p27 The Case for Reviewing Income Tax Zone Rebates, NIEIR, Nov 2011.

There is a related case for subsidising services delivered to residents (and resident
businesses) in remote and regional communities, such as passenger air services and other
long-distance travel modes.
That is, concessions and subsidies are intended to provide compensation for the additional
costs associated with living and operating in regional areas. The benefit of these must accrue
to individual residents who live, and businesses that are based, in remote and reginal areas.
At the same time, as part of their regulatory responsibilities, governments have a role in
negotiating with service providers to regions, such as regional airlines, to ensure the provision
of adequate levels of service (schedule frequency, inter-connectivity with other
services/modes) and appropriate prices are available to residents.
ALGA’s State of the Regions Report notes that while Federal Governments have moved away
from regionally focused policy in recent years, it remains valid and should be considered as
part of broader taxation reforms that are being developed and progressively implemented.

Page 12 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

3.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Inquiry Terms of Reference

On 14 February 2018, the Senate referred an inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia to the Senate Economics References Committee for inquiry
and report by the last day on sitting in June 2019.

Terms of Reference
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular
reference to government policies and programs in the following areas:
a)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;

b)

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;

c)
d)

regional development policies;
infrastructure;

e)

education;

f)

building human capital;

g)
h)

enhancing local workforce skills;
employment arrangements;

i)

decentralisation policies;

j)

innovation;

k)
l)

manufacturing; and
any other related matters.

The Committee is interested in receiving submissions addressing the above
terms of reference. It would like to hear about:
•
experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities
and unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
•
views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between
capital cities and other areas
•
analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
•

examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper?

•

policy settings which could help address inequality between regions.

Page 13 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

4.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

The significance of the local government sector to improving
regional equality through supporting economic activity

The local government sector is a key provider of services and manager of infrastructure
including community facilities, roads and bridges, stormwater, water supply and treatment.
In addition, local governments often ‘step-up’ to provide services and facilities for which they
are not traditionally responsible, but for which there is a clear community need.
This can be due to market failure, such as the absence or withdrawal of a private sector
provider, or of a provider arrangement by another level of government. This is most common
in regional areas and can include child care, education, health, housing, community welfare
and age care services and facilities.
The infrastructure and services provided by councils support the operation of regional
economies and the communities they sustain. In turn, these regional economies constitute
and connect state and national economies.
For example, Queensland local governments are responsible for a significant portfolio of public
infrastructure including 153,000 kilometres of roads and over 2,800 bridges. This network
interconnects with the State network to enable the movement of people, goods and services
across regions and supports national and international trade.
The scale of the service delivery and asset management task is considerable. Queensland
local governments manage over $100 billion of non-financial assets. By comparison, the
Commonwealth general government sector (which excludes public financial and non-financial
corporatised entities), manages $136 billion of non-financial assets (ABS 5512 2016-17).
Councils provide this wide range of infrastructure and services across vast areas with differing
geographies and population densities. Of Queensland’s 77 councils, 56 have population
densities of fewer than 10 people per square kilometre (ABS 3218.0). Population density and
local economic activity are fundamental determinants of a council’s capacity to generate ownsource revenue and to achieve delivery and other operating efficiencies.
There is also constant pressure on local government to expand the services they provide,
including as a result of expectations of equitable service levels, requirements set by other
levels of government and changes in standards and legislation. Councils must find a balance
between meeting these demands and managing their budgets in an environment of historically
irregular fiscal transfers from other levels of government.
As a sector, local government collects a modest 3 per cent of public sector revenue (ABS
5512). Under the Australian Federation’s public sector revenue arrangements local
government will continue to rely on grants, subsidies and other fiscal transfers from other
levels of government.
The provision of grants has sometimes been portrayed as ‘largesse’ towards local government
and that local government needs to become less ‘reliant’ on other levels of government.
The reality of public sector revenue collection and service delivery arrangements under the
Australian Federation is that local government will always be reliant on fiscal transfers
(especially capital grants) from State and Federal Governments, which together collect
approximately 97 per cent of public sector revenue.

Page 14 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

5. Analysis of factors affecting Queensland councils by LGAQ segment
In 2013 the LGAQ commissioned a report prepared by the AEC Group and Orion Consulting,
Factors Impacting Local Government Financial Sustainability: A Council Segment Approach.
The LGAQ would be pleased to make the full report available to the Committee for the
purposes of this Inquiry.
The analysis in that report identified the following council views on the challenges they face in
providing services and facilities to their communities:
•
•
•

•

•

•

Indigenous: lack of own source revenue streams and [lack of] ability to fund
infrastructure renewal.
Rural/Remote: the level of economic activity to support the local rate base and
community capacity to pay, along with the ability to fund infrastructure renewal.
Rural/Regional: appropriate long-term financial and asset management planning, and
the ability to fund infrastructure renewal given the lack of Queensland Government
subsidies.
Resources: impact of high levels of economic activity on infrastructure capacity and
service delivery, ability to attract and retain appropriate resources in competition with
the mining sector, and the ability to recoup sufficient revenue from the mining sector.
Coastal: the need to fund growth-driven infrastructure faced with infrastructure renewal
pressures and capped infrastructure charges, devolution of (and therefore increasing)
responsibilities, and the impact of policy and regulation on resourcing.
SEQ: the ability to effectively manage, plan, deliver and fund growth-driven infrastructure
when faced with infrastructure renewal pressures, capped infrastructure charges,
removal of State Government funding assistance for major infrastructure and pressure
on debt balances.

All segments also raised the issue of devolution of responsibilities from other levels of
Government as a significant factor impacting financial sustainability. This point, and those
highlighted against each segment above, have been validated in the results of LGAQ’s 2017
Managing for Long Term Financial Sustainability - Survey Results. Key findings from this
survey include:
•

•

•

•
•

100% of Mayors who responded indicated that their council supported extending the
eligibility criteria for grants to include maintaining and renewing the condition and
capacity of existing assets.
94% of Mayors who responded considered that there were further opportunities to
investigate cost-sharing, resource-sharing and shared delivery arrangements with other
levels of government and other councils.
83% of Mayors who responded believe they are either currently managing for long-term
financial sustainability or will have implemented systems and procedures to be in that
position by 2020, the current term for local governments.
78% of Mayors who responded identified Commonwealth and State funding as the
highest priority external factor, followed by economic activity in the region.
58% of Mayors who responded identified own-source revenue as the number one
priority internal factor, followed by asset renewal.

LGAQ’s 2013 study also reported on potential solutions that councils considered would help
address the issues contributing to their sustainability. These are summarised in Appendix 2.

Page 15 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

6.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Defining, measuring and addressing regional inequality

Regional inequality can be assessed by comparing indicators of social welfare derived from
measures of access to goods and services, and therefore to choices, inputs and opportunities.
It is also affected by access to public goods, the presence and extent of negative externalities,
and quality of life elements including the quality of environments.
The analysis of these indicators can be used to undertake needs assessments and to design
policies and delivery programs that seek to improve equality of access and opportunity.
Over the last century, technological improvements in telecommunications, refrigeration and
transportation have allowed improved access to goods and services for regional communities.
However, the availability, reliability and cost of these facilitating technologies and services
present additional costs to accessing goods and services.
Formulae-based assessments, that are subject to regular review and revision, provide a
method to determine and compensate communities for regional inequality. In Australia, a
number of methodologies have been developed to classify and rank locations in terms of their
socio-economic advantage or disadvantage.
As presented in Section 5 (above), the LGAQ classifies the 77 Queensland councils into five
segments – Coastal, Indigenous, Resources, Rural-remote and South-east Queensland. The
classification of Queensland councils considers the characteristics of the broader local
government area (LGA) including the demographic characteristics of the communities living
within these LGAs. While this serves our advocacy activities, we recognise that other
methodologies consider regional characteristics and comparative equality in more detail.
Some of these methodologies and other recent reports are summarised in Appendix 3.

7.

Comments on the Terms of Reference Topics

7.1. Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels
One of the key policy priorities for local government is how to achieve more predictable fiscal
transfers in order to support improved local government planning and budgeting, and
ultimately to provide services and facilities for their communities.
Compared with urban centres, regional councils have lower populations and receive lower
rates revenue. These regional councils rely more heavily on fiscal transfers and these
transfers represent a more significant proportion of their total revenue.
In 2013, the LGAQ commissioned a report prepared by the AEC Group and Orion Consulting,
Factors Impacting Local Government Financial Sustainability: A Council Segment Approach,
discussed in Section 5 above.
This study looked at a range of council performance indicators, including the relative rating
effort of Queensland councils, and compared council segments and with OECD data.
The study found that the overall rating effort by Queensland councils over recent years has
demonstrated steady growth and is just above the OECD average of 1 per cent of GDP
(Warren & Mangioni in AEC 2013), indicating appropriate rating revenue effort.

Page 16 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Some of the other key findings are:
•

The Rural/Remote, Indigenous and Resources segments have very low levels of ownsource revenues and are reliant on external funding from operational grants and
recoverable works contracts for financial sustainability outcomes.

•

The Coastal and SEQ segments have the highest own-source revenue levels and a
reduced reliance on external (and uncontrollable) sources of operating revenue.
However, own source revenues declined for the SEQ segment in 2010/11 as a result of
local governments no longer being directly responsible for the levying of water and
sewerage utility charges. While selected SEQ councils receive dividends, they have less
control over the dividends from year to year.

In terms of reliable fiscal transfer revenue, Financial Assistance Grants and Roads to
Recovery are two landmark programs at the Federal level, and recently Works for Queensland
has provided a similar allocative program to Queensland councils.
Over the past two years, the LGAQ has been developing a proposal with the State
Government to undertake a whole-of-government review of grant funding to local government.
The intention of this initiative is to improve grant funding arrangements through:
1.

2.

3.

the consolidation of grant programs into a small number of program streams aligned to
outcomes, with governance and oversight of each program stream comprising relevant
State Government departments and the LGAQ;
grant program arrangements that provide funding certainty to councils, thereby
supporting long-term planning, improved asset management and financial sustainability;
and
recognition that this new model is as an interim step toward a simpler, more efficient
centralised model of grant funding to local government, whereby a single State entity
oversees consolidated grant funding arrangements.

This work led to a review of Queensland State administered grant programs. Undertaken by
KPMG in conjunction with AEC Group Ltd, the review provided for a comprehensive
assessment of current grant funding arrangements including the scope, principles and
objectives for future arrangements and identification of, and transition to, a new grant model.
The KPMG/AEC report convincingly demonstrated that current grant program arrangements
are not only fragmented and costly, they are failing to deliver best value for money
infrastructure and services to Queensland’s communities.
The review also found that grant funding arrangements are undermining the ability of councils
to plan for the future and are contributing to the difficulties councils have in managing their
assets and achieving financial sustainability.
In order to assist councils to deliver infrastructure and services that are responsive to
community needs, the LGAQ will refer to the KPMG/AEC report as a platform for reform of
State Government grants to local government.
The same arguments apply to Federal Government’s application-based grant funding to local
government. The exception is Roads to Recovery, a model program that provides certainty
with significantly lower administrative costs compared with application-based programs.
In many respects, the Federal Government’s innovative approach with Roads to Recovery
program led the funding reform agenda. However, for some reason the opportunity to extend
this highly successful approach to other funding programs has not been taken up.

Page 17 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.2. Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
‘Better coordination, collaboration and partnership across all levels of government…’ was a
recommendation in the LGAQ’s submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into
Increasing Australia’s future prosperity (January 2017).
There remain considerable opportunities for better appreciation of shared goals, and better
coordination, in delivering services to the public.
Coordination and collaboration across all levels of government will be increasingly required to
achieve scale and scope efficiencies in the delivery of public infrastructure and services to
regional Australia.
While partnership and purchaser-provider models have been employed over a number of
years, there are considerable opportunities for further efficiencies across the public sector
through improved consultation, coordination and collaboration in building, operating and
maintaining public infrastructure and delivering services to support regional and national
economies.
As an adjunct to the benefits of better coordination across levels of government, the
capabilities and skills available across levels of government could be better utilised to improve
overall capability for the public sector to deliver infrastructure and services.
Federal, State and Territory governments should remain purposefully engaged with local
government to support capability building. This has been recognised and supported in the past,
and opportunities for skills transfer across levels of government remains an effective way to
support productivity improvements.
For example, in Queensland both the Department of Local Government, Racing and MultiCultural Affairs and the Queensland Treasury Corporation offer materials and run events,
some in conjunction with the LGAQ, to promote financial management skill development
across the local government sector.
The significant role of the local government sector in managing public non-financial assets,
support for the application of continuous improvement in local government management,
particularly in the field of asset management, would support improvements in productivity and
long-term financial sustainability.

7.3. Regional development policies
Local government has a primary interest in sustaining and promoting growth of their region
and is best-placed to continue to provide land use and planning directions and guidance in
local government areas and broader regions.
As noted above in comments on the Productivity Commission’s recent Transitioning Regional
Economies Report, in Queensland the Planning Act 2016 provides the overarching framework
and policy for land use planning and development assessment and local government should
be recognised as the sphere of government immediately responsible for integrated land use
planning and management.
Specifically, local governments are responsible for creating planning schemes, in consultation
with their communities, that are consistent with state planning requirements, and for assessing
development applications in their local area.
Local governments are also responsible for the planning and provisions of ‘trunk infrastructure’
which is typically shared between different developments and includes water supply,
sewerage, transport, stormwater management, parks and land for community facilities.

Page 18 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Key ongoing challenges for Queensland local governments in relation to infrastructure
provision include:
•

the vertical fiscal imbalance that exists in Australia whereby local governments collect
only 3% of the total taxation revenue,

•

the funding gap that exists for local governments in terms of revenue and costs
associated with trunk infrastructure, estimated to be $481.9 million annually across
Queensland’s high growth local governments, and

•

the current capped infrastructure charging regime which means Queensland councils
are heavily subsidising development for trunk infrastructure by over 30% of the
infrastructure costs.

In relation to regional planning in Queensland, local government supports the introduction of
a statutory regional planning framework that:
•

represents a true regional partnership between the State and local governments;

•

addresses matters of State and regional interest; and

•

informs local planning instruments.”

At present, the State Government’s regional planning framework does not comprehensively
cover all of Queensland’s regions and does not necessarily include infrastructure
considerations that support the implementation of the State Infrastructure Plan (released in
March 2016).
In the LGAQ 2018 Advocacy Action Plan, local government seeks the “development of
regional infrastructure plans as part of a statutory regional planning program, including State
budget reforms to deliver long term infrastructure projects outlined in the State Infrastructure
Plan.”
The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 also summarises the following points:
6.1.1.8 Local government supports the introduction of a statutory regional planning
framework that;
• Represents a true regional partnership between the State and local governments;
• Addresses matters of State and regional interest; and
• Informs local planning instruments.
This role also allows local government to plan for the delivery of services and facilities
that support regional economic activity, including roads, water and waste water. Land
use planning facilitates the agglomeration of businesses and supports the economic
benefits of co-location.
6.1.2.2 Local government supports the State Government developing comprehensive State
infrastructure plans that support and inform local planning instruments and statutory
regional plans.
7.2.1.1 Local government recognises that arts and culture contribute to the identity, wellbeing
and resilience of local communities. Local government uses local and regional
planning frameworks to identify and address local arts and cultural needs and
aspirations, and achieve broader social, economic and environmental outcomes.
Local government develops, funds and supports local institutions such as libraries,
galleries, museums, visitor information services and performing arts venues and, as
such, has an important role in the development, renewal and maintenance of cultural
infrastructure

Page 19 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

8.8.2

The Federal and State governments should encourage regional development as a
means of facilitating regional growth and relieving the pressures of urban growth in
major centres.

8.8.3

The Federal, State and local governments should work together to make it more
attractive for private and public sector investors to supply affordable and appropriate
housing and infrastructure in rural and remote areas.

8.8.6

Local government is a legitimate partner with State and Federal governments in
facilitating sustainable economic and regional development. Local government does
this through its role as purchaser, property owner/developer, regional leader,
infrastructure provider, economic policy and community advocate, regulator and
business development facilitator.

8.8.7

Local government supports the rollout of digital infrastructure, including the National
Broadband Network and the provision of equitable access to high speed broadband
internet. This includes support from the Federal and State governments in developing
the digital economy and online service delivery for local government.

8.9

Regional Development

8.9.1

Regional Queensland underpins the State’s economy through a diverse industry
base including agriculture, resources and tourism and seeks to be supported by
appropriate levels of service and infrastructure.

8.9.2

All spheres of government must work collaboratively in the early stages of developing
and subsequent implementation of policies and plans that impact on the social,
environmental and economic growth of regional Queensland, such as the
Queensland Plan, the Northern Australia White Paper and the Northern Australia
Infrastructure Facility.

8.9.3

The decision making processes of State and Federal governments must be
underpinned by the preparation of Regional Impact Assessment Statements
prepared independent of Government, allowing reasonable time for regional
consultation and made available for public scrutiny.

8.9.4

Development and investment in regional Queensland will occur through coordinated
programs by local, State and Federal governments. Private sector investment in
facilities and infrastructure in regional Queensland is crucial and should be
encouraged by all spheres of government.

8.9.5

Digital infrastructure and technology is recognised as an enabler to help overcome
the barriers of remoteness, infrastructure shortfalls, attract regional investment and
facilitate regional prosperity.

8.9.6

Federal and State funding for joint activities with councils in business/tourism support
must be supported by 3-5 year program agreements, and based on negotiated
agreements which specify objectives and performance criteria, reporting
mechanisms and review processes. Such agreements must commit parties for the
specified period, irrespective of elections, subject to non-performance clauses or
agreed variations.

Page 20 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.4. Infrastructure
As noted above, the local government sector is responsible for an estimated 25% of the value
of non-financial assets held by the public sector (ABS 5512).
Regional representation and input to infrastructure planning in Queensland can continue to be
provided by ROCs-. The coordination of infrastructure planning must involve all levels of
government, and local government must be recognised ahead of other non-elected bodies
operating at a regional level (see Recommendation 2.1).
In regional areas, service and infrastructure demand from resource sector projects is placing
a growing burden on local government, including additional costs associated with increased
demand from the transport task and supporting site workforces. These costs include capacity
augmentation and additional maintenance due to accelerated depreciation of assets through
higher rates of consumption.
The national freight task forecast to double over the next decade, there is increasing pressure
on councils to provide greater access to industry across its road network. This network
includes an estimated 900 timber bridges (plus approximately 350 on state controlled roads)
which, due to their deteriorating condition, are a major impediment to extending network
access and operation of higher productivity freight transport.
The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 also summarises the following points:
8.4

Communication

8.4.1

Service Access

8.4.1.1 Advances in technology should be applied to give remote areas access to telephone,
television and internet services consistent with those available in urban areas.
8.4.1.2 Local government across Queensland experiences significant inequities in mobile
phone coverage between rural and urban communities. Local government will
engage the State and Federal Governments to address this inequity.

7.5. Education
Decisions by families to remain in an area are influenced by the availability of education
available to their growing families.
While not considered a traditional sector for local government, many councils are involved in
the provision of facilities and services that support the delivery of regional education.
In regional areas, many councils are the direct provider, or partner provider, of education
facilities and services. Other local government support is provided in the form of staff housing
and school bus services.
For remote and regional communities, distance education provides a significant resource and
requires continuing support. The benefits of supporting these services are significant and there
are many success stories, including the education outcomes achieved by the students and
staff of the Longreach School of Distance Education in Queensland.
A number of institutions operate specialist education and training facilities in regional areas,
such as the University of Queensland Gatton Campus. This was established in 1897 as the
Queensland Agricultural College and has continued to make a significant contribution to the
sector and region since that time.
This model could be better supported expanded into other regions, including to establish
‘centres of excellence and education’. As with other services and infrastructure, Regional
Organisations of Councils (ROCs) in Queensland hold a strong interest in the continuing
success of regional education.

Page 21 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.6. Building human capital
Building human capital is related to education, and can include vocational, workplace and lifelong learning programs. It also includes other contributions that people bring to society.
Many regional local governments work to attract, and support the establishment and growth
of, education institutions as centres of learning, as attractors of people and to provide
economic benefits for their regions. For example, the Sunshine Coast University Hospital is a
tertiary teaching hospital serving the Sunshine Coast and Gympie regions.
An activated local economy also sustains cultural activity and local arts, and access to these
provide important attractors for both residents and visitors. Programs that support local arts
and culture, and that bring art exhibitions, music and theatre performances to community
venues and ‘masterclasses’ to schools, provide social benefits that can help sustain a
community.
Federal and State funding programs that support local arts and culture, and that allow arts and
culture to be further developed and presented in regional areas, are an essential element of
community life.

7.7. Enhancing local workforce skills
The LGAQ sees enhancing local skills as an integral part of building human capital. Generally,
during times of economic downturn, the level of skills attained by workers will be an important
determinant of their ability to maintain employment.
Public and private sector procurement policies that include a locally-sourced workforce
component, and the inclusion of training targets in major projects, provide benefits to all parties
and provide for the continuation of benefits to regions beyond the project construction stage.
The LGAQ has commenced a national project, under the Local Government Workforce
Development Group (LGWDG), to identify current and future skill needs of the sector. Local
government is a key training and skills provider in regional areas, and skill levels across the
local government sector workforce influence service delivery and standards of living.
The Local Government Workforce Development Group (LGWDG) comprises representatives
from each state and territory Local Government Association and provides advice on workforce
matters to the Australian Local Government Association.
The project will identify current and emerging skill needs of local government to better position
the sector for the future. Currently, little is known about the sector’s national employment
profile. The most accessible source of data comes from the Australian Bureau of Statistics
(ABS) Census of Population and Housing, but this is available only every 5 years and whilst it
can highlight trends it does not provide an accurate record of total employment numbers for
the local government sector, under estimating the total number of employees by 13% in 2016.
The absence of a national profile impacts on the ability of the sector to determine current and
future workforce needs and priorities. It is with this context in mind that the LGWDG has
commissioned this set of reports. These reports are underpinned by data obtained through
the National Local Government Skills Shortage Survey 2017 to which:
•
45 percent of councils across Australia and
•
69 percent of Queensland councils responded.
This Queensland Report forms part of a series of Reports commissioned by the LGWDG which
collectively are expected to provide the evidence base needed to support effective advocacy
at both a state and national level, in regard to workforce development matters. The LGAQ
National Local Government Skills Plan – Current and Future Skills Needs within the Local
Government Sector - Queensland is expected to be released in September 2018.

Page 22 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.8. Employment arrangements
The extent to which Federal and State/Territory governments provide economic conditions,
regulations and infrastructure that are conducive to trade is a major determinant of the
performance of the labour market. A prosperous economy will raise employment levels across
the region.
Predictable, allocative funding to local government significantly improves the ability of councils
to maintain their regional workforces, and to engage other local businesses.

7.9. Decentralisation policies
Decentralisation policies pursued by Federal and State governments in previous decades
targeted towns on key transport routes, including Bathurst-Orange and Albury-Wodonga.
While this approach had some limited influence in shaping the region, it is now generally
considered that comparative (and competitive) advantage serves as a foundation for
identifying and building on a region’s economic strengths.
Local Government is the decentralised level of government under the Australian Federal
system and knows the strengths of the regional economy in which it operates. As noted above,
any regional development policy process must include local government.

7.10. Innovation
Local government supports innovation and, as noted in Recommendations 2.8 and 2.9,
actively encourages and supports councils in adopting new technologies across the range of
their operations.
Unfortunately, councils are sometimes constrained by regulations and standards imposed by
other levels of government. This applies to both what councils can approve in their regions
and what councils can adopt themselves as part of a service delivery solution.
In some areas of local government operations, such as water supply, regulations inhibit the
adoption of new technologies. For example, the standards for water quality under the
Australian Drinking Water Quality Guidelines have increased substantially in the last 20 years.
The imminent implementation of health-based targets will place additional pressures across
the urban water industry to provide even higher quality water. As water quality standards
increase, the plant, equipment and procedures that have been appropriate for many years will
be insufficient. This will present a significant challenge for many rural and remote communities,
including Indigenous communities, as they work towards measuring and reporting higher
standards without any additional financial and technical support.

7.11. Manufacturing
Local government supports manufacturing, and all business activity, through a number of core
responsibilities, including land use planning, environmental regulation, and providing services
and infrastructure.
Queensland councils have undertaken significant work, and are pursuing further productivity
gains, in identifying heavy vehicle routes and expediting works to provide access to heavy
vehicle movements across the regions to support regional industries.

Page 23 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.12. Other matters – Indigenous communities
Twenty per cent of Queensland’s 77 local governments cover Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities. In these communities, councils are not just responsible for public
administration but are key to community leadership.
The democratically-elected leaders of these 17 councils, through the LGAQ’s Indigenous
Leaders Forum, are committed to improving their communities. They believe the issues
affecting their communities are best resolved through local decision making, local
determination and local solutions.
The LGAQ seeks:
•

Recognition of the leadership role of democratically elected indigenous mayors and
councillors and greater engagement with them on indigenous and community policy.

•

Ongoing support for constitutional recognition of indigenous Australians, and
appropriate funding for education and campaigning.

•

Continuation of the direct funding arrangement for housing through partnerships like the
National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing or an appropriate
model to support the needs of indigenous communities.

•

A new, community-led approach to funding for indigenous communities, including
municipal services, which aligns outcomes with ‘closing the gap’ targets.

The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 summarises the following points:
2.3.3.2 There should be genuine and collaborative partnerships between the Federal and
State Governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander local governments
democratically elected by and representative of their communities to improve their
economic and social wellbeing.
5.4.6.4 Local government recognises that the cost of waste management in rural, remote
and indigenous communities is substantial. Special resourcing and support is
required for these councils to assist them to move as close as possible to best
practice waste management having regard to their particular circumstances and
needs.
6.2.2.1 Local government acknowledges and supports the recognition, protection and
conservation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage.
7.1.7.5 Local government seeks provision of appropriate housing for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities under a continuing National Partnership Agreement on
Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH) that is environmentally appropriate,
encourages home ownership and is cost efficient.
7.2.1.3 Local government calls on the State and Federal governments to support the
development of arts and culture in regional communities through funding programs
such as Regional Arts Development Fund, the Indigenous Regional Arts
Development Fund and Regional Arts Fund, and that funding for these programs
should be maintained at least in real terms.

Page 24 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.13. Other matters – Housing
Queensland councils manage around 3,000 community housing properties, some of which are
also owned by councils. Many of these are provided in remote Indigenous communities. There
is also a growing call for local government to contribute to the ‘affordable housing’ solutions.
Therefore, Queensland councils play an important role in shaping housing policy to underpin
sustainable urban development, particularly through providing affordable housing in
communities affected by fly-in fly-out (FIFO) workforces, and in remote and regional
communities.
This role requires fit-for-purpose policy reforms and clarity around the roles and objectives of
the different levels of government as well as the non-government and private sectors.
With the review of the National Affordable Housing Agreement (and subsequent partnership
agreements), it is imperative that the Federal Government drive a national agenda to address
housing affordability.
The LGAQ seeks:
•
•
•
•
•

A National Housing Strategy identifying roles and responsibilities of all spheres of
government and the priorities relating
to affordable housing.
Continued funding for the National Affordable Housing Agreement or an improved fitfor-purpose program to expand the
stock of affordable housing in line with local government planning schemes.
Private investment incentives to deliver additional supply and enable the delivery of
affordable mixed tenure developments

7.14. Other matters –Tourism infrastructure
Regions are consistently seeking to attract tourists by presenting what is unique to their region.
The Federal Government previously offered funding to regions under the Tourism DemandDriver Infrastructure Fund. This allowed successful applicants to enhance their tourism
offerings improving amenities and building other supporting facilities.
The LGAQ believes that there are significant benefits in continuing this investment to improve
the attractiveness and competitiveness of Regional Australia’s tourism destinations to a world
market.
The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 also summarises the following points:
7.2.4

Delivering Cultural Tourism in Queensland

7.2.4.1 Local government supports capacity building of local individuals and groups including
Indigenous communities, artists, cultural organisations, businesses, community
groups and other local and regional stakeholders to build a competitive visitor
experience based on a destination’s authentic natural and cultural assets, events and
experiences.
7.2.4.2 Local government seeks to position culture more strongly within the broader tourism
conversation by promoting the artistic, cultural, social and economic value of cultural
tourism at the local, regional and state level.

Page 25 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

7.15. Other matters – Regional air services and long-distance passenger services
The LGAQ supports the continuation of regulated service levels and schedules, and
subsidised fares for regional air services and other long-distance passenger transport as a
means of allowing residents of regions to gain reasonable access to services that are not
available in their local area.
The LGAQ notes for the Committee’s reference the LGAQ submission to the Queensland
Department of Transport and Main Roads Review of Long Distance Passenger Services,
March 2013 (link provided in Appendix 1)
The LGAQ Policy Statement 2016 also summarises the following points:
8.3

Aviation 8.3.1 Regional Services

8.3.1.1 Airline licensing policies should take account of the decentralised population in
Queensland to ensure that rural residents are not disadvantaged by cost and
inadequate service levels.
8.3.1.2 The State and Federal Governments should guarantee that regional airline networks
will be protected in the conditions of sale of major airports, ensuring that access is
maintained and that regional airlines are not squeezed out by higher costs.
8.3.1.3 The Federal Government should adequately subsidise regional and sub-regional
airports and associated services as a community service obligation, with an emphasis
on rural and remote areas.

7.16. Other matters – Population and estimation methods
Given the number of funding formulae that include population, councils regularly express
concerns that there may be persistent under-enumeration of population figures. Underenumeration, and consequent under-funding, affects the ability of councils to provide services.
There are some examples of funding agencies making informed adjustments, such as the
Queensland State Library which includes an estimate of FIFO population in their funding
model.
There is also discussion of a level of demand on services created by the ‘usual, non-resident
population’. Non-resident population demand for goods and services can be attributed to
tourists, including drive tourists, and itinerant workers.
While these visitors may provide some contribution to the local private economy, their
consumption of public facilities and services does not typically result in any contribution
towards the costs to local government of providing those services.
Some (State/Territory) governments have in the past applied a charge (such as a ‘bed tax’) to
accommodation providers, however the growth of the ‘private accommodation’ market (eg.
Airbnb) presents new challenges.
The LGAQ calls for the estimation of population in relation to funding and planning to be
examined to include regularly revised, regional adjustment factors that reflect the actual
demand for public services.

-o0o-

Page 26 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

APPENDIX 1 - Recent related LGAQ and ROC submissions
1.

on regional air services - LGAQ submission to the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and
Transport References Committee Inquiry into the operation, regulation and funding of air
route service delivery to rural, regional and remote communities – February 2018
“Environmental Scan of Air Route Service Delivery to Rural, Regional and Remote
Communities” (prepared by AEC Group for the LGAQ);
https://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=85db12a2-a889-4ed0-89a9a10d40da86ff&subId=564076

2.

on digital economies – the 2017 LGAQ Digital Productivity Report;
http://bit.ly/digitalproductivity

3.

on remote and regional indigenous communities - LGAQ Response to the Draft report of
the Queensland Productivity Commission Inquiry into service delivery in remote and
discrete Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, November 2017,
http://bit.ly/ResponseInquiryIntoServiceDeliveryInremoteAndDiscreteAboriginalAndTorresStraitIslanderComm
unities

4.

LGAQ Submission to the Inquiry into service delivery in remote and discrete Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities, June 2017;
http://bit.ly/SubmissionInquiryIntoServiceDeliveryInRemoteAndDiscreteAboriginalAndTorresStraitIslanderCom
munities

5.

on remote Indigenous community housing - LGAQ submission to the Review of the
National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH) Dec 2016;
http://bit.ly/SubmissionReviewOfTheNationalPartnershipAgreementOnRemoteIndigenousHousingNPARIH

6.

LGAQ Submission to the Department of Transport and Main Roads Review of Long
Distance Passenger Services, March 2013;
http://bit.ly/Submission-ReviewofLongDistancePassengerServices2013

7.

The Case for Reviewing Income Tax Zone Rebates, NIEIR for the Council of Mayors
Darling Downs and South-West Queensland and RDA - Darling Downs & SWQ, November
2011
http://bit.ly/TheCaseforReviewingIncomeTaxZoneRebatesNIEIR

Page 27 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

APPENDIX 2 - Internal & external controls impacting council financial
sustainability
Segment
Indigenous

Internal
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

Rural/
Remote

•

•
•
•

•
•

Rural/
Regional

•
•

•
•

External

Reduce the prominence of operating deficits.
Given the inability to leverage off economies of
scale in operation and identified resourcing
limitations, consider alternative business
models and resource sharing to ensure:
More cost-effective administration and
compliance functions; and
Appropriate access to specialist management
and technical expertise.
Workforce strategies to better manage and
build capability of the local workforce.
Commitment to long-term financial
sustainability and asset management planning.
Review of assets, services and service
standards/levels to ensure funds can be
appropriated towards asset renewal /
replacement.

•

Given the inability to leverage off economies of
scale in operation and identified resourcing
limitations, consider alternative business
models and resource sharing to ensure:
More cost-effective administration and
compliance functions; and
Appropriate access to specialist management
and technical expertise.
Workforce strategies to assist in the attraction
and retention of professional and skilled
technical employees, either at the local or
regional level.
Commitment to long-term financial
sustainability and asset management planning.
Review of assets, services and service
standards/levels to ensure funds can be
appropriated towards asset renewal /
replacement.

•

Reduce the prominence of operating deficits.
Continue to monitor the appropriateness of
rating levels given that a high rating effort
already exists and review the efficiency of
existing rating structures (in terms of the
incidence placed on different ratepayer
classes).
Commitment to long-term financial
sustainability and asset management planning.
Review of assets, services and service
standards/levels to ensure funds can be
appropriated towards asset renewal /
replacement.

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•
•

•

Ensure appropriate external operational and
grant funding assistance given sustainability is
entirely dependent on such funding.
Reduce compliance burden.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.
Explore alternative options for the delivery of
government services with greater utilisation of
local providers.
Explore long-term strategies to improve skill
levels of local people to fill local, State and
Commonwealth jobs.
Recognition of the broader role performed by
Indigenous councils in providing a range of
services in their communities and appropriately
fund for these services.

Ensure appropriate external operational and
grant funding assistance given sustainability is
heavily dependent on such funding.
Ensure that contract works arrangements with
other levels of Government remain in place or
begin making arrangements to amend
resourcing and costs as appropriate if they are
at risk.
Reduce compliance burden.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.

Ensure appropriate external operational and
grant funding assistance given sustainability is
influenced by such funding.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.

Page 28 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Segment

Internal

External

Resources

•

•

•

•
•
•

•
•

•

Coastal

•
•

•

•
•

SEQ

•
•

•

Ensure appropriate funding of infrastructure
required to service the resources sector through
direct contributions, particularly where there is a
high risk of that infrastructure becoming stranded
in the event of the resources sector exiting from
the Local Government area in question.
Given the inability to leverage off economies of
scale in operation and identified resourcing
limitations, consider alternative business models
and resource sharing to ensure:
More cost-effective administration and
compliance functions; and
Appropriate access to specialist management
and technical expertise.
Workforce strategies to assist in the attraction
and retention of professional and skilled technical
employees, either at the local or regional level.
Commitment to long-term financial sustainability
and asset management planning.
Review of assets, services and service
standards/levels to ensure funds can be
appropriated towards asset renewal /
replacement.
Continue to monitor the appropriateness of rating
categories and levels applied to the resource
sector to ensure adequate revenue is generated
to meet the demands placed on infrastructure
and service delivery.

•

•
•

Appropriate facilitation and funding of
infrastructure required to meet resources sector
needs by other levels of Government and the
resources sector.
Ensure appropriate external operational and grant
funding assistance given sustainability is
influenced by such funding.
Reduce compliance burden.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.

•
Reduce the prominence of operating deficits.
Proactively monitor the ongoing impact of providing
growth infrastructure on future borrowing capacity
given recent significant increases in debt.
•
Continue to monitor the appropriateness of rating
levels given that a high rating effort already exists
and review the efficiency of existing rating
structures (in terms of the incidence placed on
different ratepayer classes).
Commitment to long-term financial sustainability
and asset management planning.
Review of assets, services and service
standards/levels to ensure funds can be
appropriated towards asset renewal / replacement.

Appropriate external funding assistance for growth
infrastructure, including the removal of infrastructure
charges caps.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.

•
Reduce the prominence of operating deficits.
Proactively monitor the ongoing impact of providing
growth infrastructure on future borrowing capacity
given recent significant increases in debt and the
•
likelihood for constrained borrowing for a number
of Local Governments moving forward.
Commitment to long-term financial sustainability
and asset management planning.

Appropriate external funding assistance for growth
infrastructure, including the removal of infrastructure
charges caps.
No additional devolution of responsibilities.

Page 29 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

APPENDIX 3 - Recent papers on Regional Inequality in Australia
1.

ABS SEIFA 2016 (released 27 March 2018)

The Australian Bureau of Statistics “broadly defines relative socio-economic advantage and
disadvantage in terms of people's access to material and social resources, and their ability to
participate in society” as indicated by the socio-economic conditions of a community (ABS
SEIFA p6).
Based on ABS Census data, the Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas 2016 (SEIFA) provides a
series of indicators. SEIFA 2016 has been created from Census 2016 data and consists of
four indexes: Relative Socio-economic Disadvantage (IRSD), Relative Socio-economic
Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD), Education and Occupation (IEO), and Economic
Resources (IER).
An analysis of local government areas (LGA) is provided in table 2033.0.55.001. According to
these data across Australia, analysis of Queensland’s 77 councils indicates that two thirds of
Queensland LGAs are ranked in the lowest 50 per cent of socio-economic disadvantage.
The ABS SEIFA indexes provide valuable indicators when formulating policy based on the
needs of regions and in designing effective delivery programs to address inequality issues.

2.

Productivity Commission Transitioning Regional Economies, Dec 2017

The Productivity Commission report includes a range of indicators and recommendations.
While the Federal Government has decided to take a different direction on some matters, there
remain a number of recommendations which would contribute to improved regional
development policies.
In particular, the LGAQ supports the following recommendations:

Recommendation 5.3
State and Territory governments, in consultation with local governments and communities,
should develop a single consistent definition of Australia’s regions to be used to inform
regional development planning and policy.
Regions should be based on functional economic regions, so as to take into account the
stronger linkages and interdependencies between neighbouring communities.
State, Territory and local governments should adopt these classifications for guiding regional
policy and planning.

On Productivity Commission Recommendation 5.4, in Queensland the LGAQ recommends
that the Regional Organisations of Councils (ROC) provide the appropriate entity at a
functional economic region level with which to engage. ROCs are also linked into the
Queensland Regional Roads and Transport Groups (RRTGs) network. State Government
agencies, business and regional communities already engage with ROCs in the way
recommended by the Productivity Commission.

Page 30 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

On Productivity Commission Recommendation 5.5, similar to the points made above, LGAQ
supports the utilisation of existing Regional Organisations of Councils (ROC) arrangements in
Queensland to promote the development and implementation of regional plans. For example,
councils and RRTGs are working with the State Government to develop Regional Transport
Plans. These will further inform the integration of priorities across the State and local road
networks, with the objective of improving productivity
On integrated approaches to planning between the State and local governments, in
Queensland the Planning Act 2016 provides the overarching framework and policy for land
use planning and development assessment and local government should be recognised as
the sphere of government immediately responsible for integrated land use planning and
management.
Specifically, local governments are responsible for creating planning schemes, in consultation
with their communities, that are consistent with state planning requirements, and for assessing
development applications in their local area.
Local governments are also responsible for the planning and provisions of ‘trunk infrastructure’
which is typically shared between different developments and includes water supply,
sewerage, transport, stormwater management, parks and land for community facilities.
Key ongoing challenges for Queensland local governments in relation to infrastructure
provision include:
•

the vertical fiscal imbalance that exists in Australia whereby local governments collect
only 3% of the total taxation revenue,

•

the funding gap that exists for local governments in terms of revenue and costs
associated with trunk infrastructure, estimated to be $481.9 million annually across
Queensland’s high growth local governments, and

•

the current capped infrastructure charging regime which means Queensland councils
are heavily subsidising development for trunk infrastructure by over 30% of the
infrastructure costs.

In relation to regional planning in Queensland, local government supports the introduction of
a statutory regional planning framework that:
•

represents a true regional partnership between the State and local governments;

•

addresses matters of State and regional interest; and

•

informs local planning instruments.”

At present, the State Government’s regional planning framework does not comprehensively
cover all of Queensland’s regions and does not necessarily include infrastructure
considerations that support the implementation of the State Infrastructure Plan (released in
March 2016).
In the LGAQ 2018 Advocacy Action Plan, local government seeks the “development of
regional infrastructure plans as part of a statutory regional planning program, including State
budget reforms to deliver long term infrastructure projects outlined in the State Infrastructure
Plan.”

Page 31 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

3.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

ALGA State of the Regions 2017-18 – Pillars of Regional Growth

The latest edition of the Australian Local Government Association (ALGA) State of the Regions
report emphasises four drivers of productivity growth - skills formation, capital investment,
knowledge-creation and the formation of supply chains.
These drivers are identified as being key to regional economic growth and, in turn, to improving
regional equality. The report makes the point that each of these drivers are supported by public
infrastructure and services that must be adequately funded.
The Report Appendices provide time series for indicators that can be used to compare the
activity of regions. Appendix 5 provides definitions for the comparative indicators used in
comparing the relative performance of regions.
The Report notes that, over Australia’s economic history, Federal governments have been
prepared to use a wide range of policy mechanisms to improve regional economic activity and
equality, including tax-financed education and other measures to promote equality of
opportunity thereby ensuring the best utilisation of the country’s human resources.
More recently there has been a reliance on the finance sector premised on the belief that
market decisions and market incentives, conducted within a competitive framework, will
maximise economic growth.
However, markets that operate well in a capital city may not operate as well, and often times
do not exist, in the regions. While this approach has provided benefits in more populous
centres in Australia, the regions have not enjoyed the same level of benefit.

4.

CEDA How unequal? Insights on inequality April 2018

In April 2018 CEDA released its report How unequal? Insights on inequality. This is a collection
of seven essays by academic researchers each dealing with an aspect of regional equality.
Essay 3 emphasises that education is an essential component of any nation’s economic,
political, cultural and social development.
“It is the main vehicle for social mobility for individuals. It develops skills, attitudes and
attributes that are essential for creating active, engaged and productive citizens. It is the key
to promoting a tolerant, cohesive, prosperous and innovative society.”
Essay 5 suggests that geographic inequality can be identified by comparing the relative rates
of social and economic development between different geographical areas compared at state,
region, postcode and neighbourhood levels.
This essay provides a table of dominant characteristics of disadvantaged locations for each
state and territory from a 2015 study Dropping off the Edge. For example, key disadvantage
characteristics for Queensland are listed as youth disengagement, long-term unemployment,
prison admissions, low family income and access to internet.

Page 32 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

5.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

Centre for Labour Market Research, University of Canberra, Australia
Regional Inequality and the Trade Cycle, Michael Corliss and Phil Lewis

The paper examines employment and incomes, and the effect that economic growth has had
on regional inequality. Overall, the study found that while economic growth acts to significantly
reduce jobless rates, “reducing the differences between SLAs is much more stubborn,
particularly for remote regions.” While strong economic growth increased employment
opportunities, it did nothing to change the structural differences between (and within) regions
regarding the jobless rate.
Analysis of tax data found that growth was associated with diverging incomes, and downturns
are associated with converging incomes between areas.
The influence of the business cycle mostly impacted upon the of capital cities and remote
regions where there was greatest differences between regions. The remaining regions
showed considerably less difference between regions and the business cycle was of little
consequence.
According to this study, the business cycle and economic growth has a greater impact upon
higher income areas in both the upturn and in the downturn phase of the business cycle.

6.

Grattan Institute Working Paper No. 2017-8, Regional patterns of Australia’s
economy and population August 2017

This paper examines incomes, employment and demographics across regions of Australia
over the past decade. Figure 2.3 provides a map showing average taxable incomes by region
(ABS SA3).
The paper notes that data have been influenced by broad economic events, including mining
investment in particular regions and the structural shift of employment from agriculture and
manufacturing to services.
“Since the mid-1980s, the share of jobs in agriculture, forestry and fishing has fallen from 6.1
per cent to 2.5 per cent and in manufacturing from 16.1 per cent to 7.5 per cent.
Manufacturing’s share of the economy declined accordingly” (ABS 6291.0).

7.

Local Government National Report 2014-15 (February 2017) - on the
operations of the Local Government (Financial Assistance) Act 1995 (Cth).

The Local Government National Report 2014-15 (App E) applies a classification to councils
by each State and territory and shows the per capita funding under the General Purpose Grant,
and per kilometre funding under the Identified Roads Grant.
While the report is published with a significant lag, each year the Commonwealth Grants
Commission applies its relativities formulae to allocate funding to States and Territories.
In turn, the respective State local government grants commissions apply formulae based on
the equalisation principles to allocate funding to local governments across their jurisdiction.
That is, there are timely, regularly updated analyses of regional differences (including indices
and adjustment factors) available This report found that for reference when developing policies
that seek to improve regional equality.

Page 33 of 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 115

Submission May 2018

8.

Indicators of, and impact on, regional inequality - Australia

ACOSS Inequality in Australia 2015 (first edition of Inequality in Australia
part of the ‘Poverty and Inequality in Australia’ series)

Using income as a measure of equality, the report found that “There is an urban and regional
pattern to income inequality, with people in capital cities more likely to be in the top 20%, while
those outside capital cities are more likely to be in the bottom 20%.”
This report also found that “Australia’s level of income inequality is above the OECD average,
but below countries such as the United States or the United Kingdom, which have very high
levels of inequality. While inequality in Australia is not extreme by international comparison,
we are moving in the wrong direction.”

9.

The Australia Institute - Income and wealth inequality in Australia - Policy
Brief No. 64 July 2014 (Richardson and Denniss)

Similar to other papers, this report found that “inequality between those with the most and
those with the least is rising in Australia.” The report concludes that a progressive taxation
system remains a primary policy tool “to redistribute income [more] effectively to reduce
inequality.”
Better use of the taxation system, including region concessions / rebates for residents, is
also called for in the submissions from a number of regional Queensland councils.

10. ACELG & LGAQ Community Wellbeing Indicators - Measures for local
government - May 2013
The majority of Queensland councils have developed a long-term community plan that
embodies respective community views, visions and values, and outlines how the community
aspires to reach its full potential.
The amended Local Government Act 2012 (Qld) removed the legislative requirement to adopt
long term community plans. However, where community plans are in place across Queensland,
there is reasonable community expectation that councils implement initiatives based on these
plans. There is also widespread evidence across local governments in Queensland of an
interest in using effective indicators for community planning before and after these legislative
amendments.
The inter-relationship between community well-being, economic development, ecological
sustainability, the built environment, social equity and justice have long been recognised as
integral to the role of local government.
This is reflected in a resurgent global interest in these inter-relationships, most evident in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) Global Project for
Measuring the Progress of Societies and nationally with the Australian Bureau of Statistics
Measures of Australia’s Progress (2012) and Australian National Development Index (ANDI).

-o0o-

Page 34 of 34

