Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

1 June 2018

Committee Secretariat
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600

Dear Sir/Madam

The Bendigo & Adelaide Bank (the Bank) is pleased to provide a submission to the Senate
Economics References Committee (SERC) and to provide our organisations view into the
indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Our submission will focus on the experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to
opportunities and unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas.

Summary of Key Insights for the consideration of the SERC
The ability for communities to attract investment and capital into their places is a
significant determinant of advantage or disadvantage.
Communities need to be organised, planned and resourced to attract investment unless
those communities have a degree of political influence.
There has not been a long term integrated policy platform or focus on building community
capacity in rural communities at a State or Federal level that has had any measure of
continuity.
Investing in human capital is a long term game and it is difficult to measure hard outcomes.
Nevertheless, we must commit to investing in human capital for the long term.
Many rural and regional communities are locked out of funding programs due to the need to
demonstrate hard economic outcome leaving social assets in decline.
We know from practical experience, that influencing others to invest in some rural and
regional areas is a difficult proposition, unless there is a bushfire or flood.
Many rural Local Government Authorities lack resources (financial and human).
Funding programs favour the already resourced and capable and those with natural
advantage (location, resources).

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

Decisions on resource allocation are still primarily made in a centralised way. Often
decision makers are far removed from rural and regional communities and therefore lack an
appreciation of what is needed.
Our experience is that small communities do not have the tactical know how to negotiate
the vagaries of funding programs, let alone understand the programs of the day. So, the
communities that need support the most, are often the ones standing on their own due to
their inability to influence the priorities of others.
Regional forums (like the RDA) are effective in planning for regional priorities but need
longer term certainty of tenure and resource allocation responsibilities to drive leveraged
investment into local communities, and to engender sub regional and regional
collaboration.
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank – a brief history
Our history began in 1858 on the Bendigo goldfields when we responded to the sudden and rapid
wave of migration, establishing the Bendigo Mutual Permanent Land and Building Society to
improve conditions for thousands of migrants seeking their fortune.
Soon after in 1877, South Australia's Hindmarsh Building Society was established, founded on the
principles that home ownership was the cornerstone of a successful community and that owning a
home should be possible for everyone.
These businesses and more than 80 other organisations have come together to become the
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank Group, an Australian owned, top 60 ASX listed company, with more than
99,000 shareholders.
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank has assets under management of more than $65.7 billion and market
capitalisation of around $4.6 billion.
We are Australia's fifth largest retail bank, with more than 7,200 staff helping our 1.6 million
customers to achieve their financial goals.
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank's vision is to be Australia's most customer-connected bank, and we
believe our success is driven by helping our customers and the communities in which we operate
to be successful.
This history informs who we are today.
The Community Bank® model
In Australia, more than 2,050 bank branches closed between 1993 and 2000. These closures
represented a 29% reduction in branch numbers in seven years and left many communities without
banking services.
These closures coincided with a more general rationalisation of services particularly with the Local
Government reforms and with centralisation of many State and Federal Government
instrumentalities.
In our view, the economic and social impact of these changes had a profound impact on many
Australian communities. It wasn’t just the services that were being lost, it was also the people who

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

worked, lived and contributed so much to the social and economic fabric of these towns and
neighbourhoods.
It is also our view that many communities felt a “loss of control” with policies and decisions
impacting on these places being made without the input of the locals and in many cases, without
proper regard to the consequences.
Throughout the years, the Bendigo & Adelaide Bank has recognised and promoted that one of the
reasons for decline in rural districts as well as many suburban areas is the inability of individual
communities to effectively manage the financial, human, intellectual and social capital generated in
their regions.

Feeding into prosperity of communities
Banks were originally formed to help facilitate the flow of capital within communities, to help build
and sustain a prosperous village.
In the 90’s we saw an opportunity for a new banking model that held true to the original intentions
of banks. We looked at the cooperative banks in Europe and the community banking structures in
the United States and we looked at what had occurred in the towns and regions around Australia
but particularly in Victoria.
We came to the conclusion that we needed a much more embracing model, one that had the
commerciality and accountabilities of the neoclassical shareholder model but one that also had at
its core the focus on community, so prevalent in the early cooperative and mutual structures.
We believed that if we focussed on the success of customers and of communities our own success
as a bank would be assured.
In 1998 we partnered with the communities of Rupanyup and Minyip with the opening of the first
Community Bank® branches.
The anatomy of a Community Bank® branch
A Community Bank® branch is formed by a locally owned and operated company as a franchise
of Bendigo & Adelaide Bank. This follows an intensive period of engagement by a local steering
committee which includes, a pledge of support process, a feasibility stage and finally a capital raise
via a prospectus of between $600,000 to $800,000 in today’s terms.
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank provides the coverage of its banking licence, a full range of banking
products, staff training and ongoing support.
The Board of each Community Bank® company is made up of local volunteers while the staff
employed to work at the Community Bank® branch are typically members of the local community.
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank and the community company share agreed portions of the banking
revenue. Profits made by the local company are available for reinvestment into the community
through dividends to shareholders and investments into local community projects.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

The Community Bank® Network today
•
•
•
•
•
•

As at the 30th of May this year the total number of Community Bank® branches in
Australia is 322 (and growing).
The communities have raised in excess of $170 million of share capital.
Total business footings exceeded $35 billion (locally retained business of which the
community is receiving a revenue base).
Monthly salaries paid to local staff exceed $8 million.
Dividends paid to local shareholder - $50 million.
Total community contributions to projects, programs, grants and sponsorship – in excess
of $200 million.

The Community Bank Community Bank® as an information source
With a network of 322 Community Bank® branches, approximately half of which reside in
regional, rural and remote areas around Australia, the Bank has a rich reservoir of community
insights to tap into. We believe that it is in the best interest of Australia that these insights are
formally recognised, shared, and acted upon.
The Bank has a very deliberate approach to the identification of common community priorities
within the Network by:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Having over 1900 locally based Community Bank® Directors, all of whom are connected
within their communities.
Supporting community led priority setting – (Community Impact Planning Framework).
Facilitating Community Forums around key issues and opportunities.
Galvanising Community Bank® branches into clusters of mutual interest to take a
collaborative approach to shared priorities and to facilitate multi town collaboration.
State Conference and National Conference programs – identifying and addressing
Network objectives for community initiatives.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

The culmination of these processes and activities led the Bank to develop the “Community Impact
Agenda” to enable a more coordinated, effective and importantly, longer term approach to the
elements that build and sustain communities.

Tracking Community Bank® community investments
The following illustration captures Community Bank® community investments for the 2016
financial year. It’s important to note that these investments are determined by the Community
Bank® Boards based on knowledge of local needs. In a sense this is a “for community by
community’ approach.
The almost 5000 individual investments can be as varied as putting shade sails over the
kindergarten playground to helping to attract a General Practitioner to an area.
Smaller grants typically go to community groups while some of the larger investments, particularly
are directed to Local Government, Health Sector or Education Providers as part of leveraged
funding arrangements.
Through their local Community Bank® branch, communities are able to partner on equal terms
with other funding bodies due to the financial resources they can bring to the table. We believe
“Cash in hand beats cap in hand – hands down”.
This paper does not attempt to fully describe the activities, the strategies nor the priorities of the
Bank and the Community Bank® Network and how they are being delivered. Rather, the
background provided is to set context and a basis for commentary on the question being
considered as part of the Bank’s submission.
What we can say is that we actively encourage the communities we partner with to have a story
about what the future of their community looks like and to have a clear set of community programs

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

and initiatives that take them some way towards that future. Of course, we would be delighted to
expand on any material provided in this paper upon request.

Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and
other areas
There are many categories of “inequality” inherent within this statement. We know that through the
many rural health assessments undertaken through our partnership with the National Centre for
Farmers Health, there is a clear inequality in health status. The number of health related projects
which are funded through the Community Bank® Network, particularly around workforce
recruitment and development would suggest there is still a shortfall in funding adequate service
provision. So too for health infrastructure, once the lifeblood of small communities, due to
economies of scale, most health investments are being made to regional facilities. This is seeing
the growth of major regional areas at the expense of small rural communities as people seek
close, accessible health care.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

On the other side of this equation is the cost to regional service providers to deliver services in
remote locations. It is simply more affordable and considerably easier to deliver services close to
head office to achieve funding and service agreement targets.
So, while there are many categories and many causes of and for inequity, perhaps the one that
stands out most for us, is the ability for communities to influence investment into their place,
whether that be social or economic investment. In many cases it will depend on whose plan they
are on and why.
Growth corridors, marginal electorates, resourced Local Government Authorities, and areas of a
high degree of political and social activism are much more likely to have a capacity to influence.
We know from practical experience, that influencing others to invest in some rural and regional
areas is a much harder proposition, unless there is a bushfire or flood.

Case study 1
Take the example of the Charlton community in North West Victoria where the Community Bank®
Board has spent 12 years fighting for State and Federal Government funding for new and
improved sporting facilities despite having raised $1 million, which represents almost $1,000 for
every Charlton resident. In that time the community recovered from two devastating floods with the
assistance of government and community contributions.
Finding funding to secure a vital piece of the communities social and sporting infrastructure has
been a much harder proposition, one which the Charlton residents may well not have embarked on
in the first instance had they known how difficult the exercise would prove to be. Despite all of the
obstacles, tenders are now being called to build a $4.0 million facility. Without the financial
resources and persistence of the Charlton Community Bank® Board, this simply would not have
been achieved.

Case Study 2
Nathalia Community Bank® branch took matters into their own hands with the development of an
Economic Plan for their township. In an effort to retain local jobs and capital in the Nathalia
community the Community Bank® branch funded the construction of the new Parks Victoria office
complex. The $650,000 complex was constructed using local tradespeople and provided
employment opportunities for local residents. The new office complex accommodates 12
permanent employees and is used as the regional fire control centre in the event of an emergency.
The Community Bank® company receives a rental income from the new premises, which will be
returned to the community via local grants and sponsorships.
The Community Bank® Board also funded a Child Care Centre, provided upgrades to the local
Hospital and were instrumental in opening up a small housing subdivision to accommodate the
building of homes for new residents. This is a practical example of “integrated planning” driven at
the local level.

Case Study 3
Collie Community Bank® Board is investing $200,000 to develop young entrepreneurs in their
town as a means to diversify their economic base, which is so dependent on ageing mining
infrastructure.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

Case Study 4
Sheffield Railton Community Bank® Board is taking a bus load of businesses and Local
Government representatives on a two hour trip to the small town of Derby which has been
reinvigorated through the development of a mountain bike trail. Sheffield has received funding to
build a similar attraction and is looking at the lessons learned from Derby to ensure they are
maximising the economic benefits.

Case Study 5
The Coleambally Community Bank® Board covers the wages of a part time Registered Nurse to
implement a Specialist Physiotherapy Pain Management Program in their local community as well
as the Aged Care Facility. The program is developed by a qualified Physiotherapist who trains a
suitable specialist Registered Nurse to implement the program with the residents and clients on a
year round basis.
These case studies are a just a small sample of the thousands of community programs supported
through the Community Bank® Network.
Some projects are achieved with assistance of Government, others are done despite the
resistance of Government.
Our experience is that small communities do not have the tactical know how to negotiate the
vagaries of funding programs, let alone understand the programs of the day. So, the communities
that need support the most, are often the ones standing on their own due to their inability to
influence the priorities of others.
The fact that the Bendigo Bank has a specialist team to assist communities in this regard is
testament to a system that is not working. The fact the Bendigo Bank has designed a community
planning approach to allow the citizens to collectively organise and act is another example of a
need for change.
Having short term, one off funding programs which do not recognise the interrelationship between
various community priorities from a timing perspective or recognise the benefits from inter and intra
community collaborative projects is also anachronistic, if it ever belonged at all.
The Community Bank® model can be described in many ways. The real power is that the
community can sign up to an enduring partnership with Bendigo Bank and in the process have
a partner who is as interested in their success as they are. After all, the Banks success is
dependent upon the success of the communities in which we operate. Importantly, the
community also knows what the deal is, the reward for effort. This cannot be underestimated,
because it provides the motivation for that community to collects its leaders, to dream, to plan
and to act knowing that we will deliver on our part of the agreement as well.
In the early days, Community Banking was about empowering communities to reduce the capital
drain. It moved on to attracting capital, by creating a community in which others were willing to
invest. The next stage is about building adaptive communities focussing on nurturing the talent
within, to meet the challenges of a disruptive world.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 116

From our perspective, we intend to take this challenge using an inclusive approach with key
partners who can bring something of value to the table. This may lead to the creation of new
approaches, new models, new forms of community governance and new partners. Having the
Australian Government on board as a partner would be a significant help.

Yours sincerely

Collin Brady
Head of Community Development
Bendigo & Adelaide Bank Ltd

