Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 121

@ Regional
izv Development ,
e “ Valia
MIDWEST GASCOYNE

Committee Secretariat
Regional Inequality in Australia

Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100

Parliament House

Canberra ACT 2600

28 June 2018
Dear Sir/Madam
REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Please consider accepting this submission to the Regional Inequality in Australia Inquiry, apologies
for missing the closing date.

Inequality Issues

Section 99 of Australian Constitution seeks to provide equity to all regions of Aust and prevent
favouritism from the Commonwealth Government. States it would seem can be more flexible in the
delivery of services to meet the changing demands of their residents and economy.

This provision is often used to argue that every constituent therefore needs to provide an equal
contribution from the Commonwealth Government towards services in their regions — there is no
tax rates based on the level of services you can access the further you are from Canberra.

Hence it would seem that Commonwealth services should be spread equitably across the whole of
Australia.

This ideology is just that and everyone knows that the reality of this vast country requires unique
approaches to providing services and access equitably. For example, it would be unsustainable to
provide an MRI machine to every regional centre around Australia, not only is the cost prohibitive,
but we wouldn’t have the skilled people to run them all. So regional people recognise for specialist
services like this we need to travel to the machine. In most instances there is some form of
assistance to travel to the service (not that everyone takes advantage of this).

Level 1, 23 Durlacher Street Geraldton WA Postal — PO Box 1517 GERALDTON 6531
Phone (08) 99645757 ABN 22 450 469 916
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 121

However, it seems that there are unashamed areas where the Commonwealth Government seems
to be deviating from Sect 99. Some recent examples include:

Regional Jobs and Investment Package

This program provides incentives to discrete areas of Australia and provides through the
appropriation Bills the funding in preference to these parts of the States and this is not available to
any other areas or States.

| feel that this is against the intent of section 99 of the Australian Constitution and will create bias
towards these areas that do not appear to be in any more need than any other area of Australia.

Essentially the program allows the Commonwealth to provide matching funding to LGA's, NFP's and
private businesses to grow their business and deliver services and infrastructure. This funding is only
available in 10 regions selected as election commitments.

This will see commerce move from one area to another to take advantage of this program and hence
disadvantage other areas.

Delivery of services via Tender
An example is the Australian Small Business Advisory Service.

ASBAS is not delivered in all regions across Australia. In the Midwest, | believe the service was not
tendered for as a result of the closure of a delivery agent at the time tenders were open, resulting in
no submission.

As a default position via the tender process, large areas of Australian small business have missed the
opportunity to access these services, as successful delivery agents are not required to service
businesses outside of the nominated area they tendered for.

It seems unequitable that the Australian Government only delivers services where communities win
the right to have a service delivered. It would seem that the areas where a comprehensive proposal
cannot be put together are the locations that need this service more than anywhere.

An alternative view is that regional Australians can access services via the internet. However, it is
more likely that metropolitan Australians can better access online services due to the availability of
high speed broadband at cheaper rates than regional services and satellite access.

On seeking ASBAS services online it previously directed people to the Regional Development
Australia program for these services in the regions, RDA is not funded to deliver these services.

ASBAS has also provided services to assist Tourism assistance in Northern Australia. In WA the
Pilbara region BEC won this contract. However, the majority of Tourism operators are in the
Kimberley and Gascoyne. The Pilbara BEC is already significantly supported by the Mining Industry
and has abundant resources to develop proposals to provide services.

There are a range of other Commonwealth services that are now delivered via a tender process, with
services awarded on the metrics of the tender, not the need or demand across regions. Shouldn't we
expect that services are delivered to everyone, equally from the commonwealth government?
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 121

Further, often in the larger centres, there is a plethora of businesses that already provide these
services and so providing Government services in these areas where a functioning commercial
operation exists is not required and services should be directed to regions where there is market
failure in providing access to these services.

Further, this situation is made even more inequitable with the provision of funds for communities
and industry and governments via competitive grants process. Examples include Regional Grant
Fund, Building Better Regions Fund. These grants that are competitive inherently favour larger
communities that have ample resources to develop comprehensive applications and have vast
funding reserves to leverage funding targets. An example is a medium sized QLD Local Government
which has over $100M in their reserve account, this LGA has a great capacity to deliver projects in
their own right, but uses these funds to meet grant matching requirements, leaving other smaller
Shires struggling to meet funding commitments.

If grants are to be delivered to regions, perhaps the most equitable approach would be to allocate
funds across regions on a per captia basis or a defined needs basis, subject to the development of a
suitable project being developed. Alternatively, there can be a yearly grant to Local Government for
specific purposes as agreed. An annual allocation will allow Local government to plan and match
funding based on their revenue.

There is no doubt that a review of primary indicators for:

© Health
* Education
¢ Employment opportunities

Will demonstrate that regional Australians are well below the metropolitan counterparts.

Other issues that impact Regional Australians are the lack of Private services that are available. You
will see regular news reports of the “last Bank in the town closing”. So, where there appears to be a
lower profit margin for large profitable companies, they are quitting regional Australia with no
concern for the impact the loss of services or community this causes. In many instances the
Government has walked away from providing these services as there was “adequate commercial
operators providing these services”.

There appears to be no appetite from government to require companies operating in Australia to
provide services across the whole of Australia, not just the most profitable areas. Insurance is
another area where regional communities in the North are often unable to obtain insurance or it is
at a cost that is unaffordable.

Perhaps the Government should introduce a requirement that companies who wish to operate in
Australia need to offer services uniformly across the whole of Australia not just cherry pick the most
profitable locations.
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 121

Recommendations:

1. Australian Government should move away from providing adhoc grants and services and
only provide services directly across Australia in the most uniform way possible or to address
identified high level issues.

2. Grants should be provided to State and Local Governments in a fixed and ongoing basis to
allow for budget planning and consistent delivery.

3. Recognise that regional communities are often missing out on services and benefits of
metropolitan counterparts and consider a range of incentives to maintain regional
populations and services.

Best Regards

jan Bradley
Director Regional Development
RDAMWG
