Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129

CORDS Logo

Submission
To the
Senate Standing Committees on
Economics
On
Regional Inequality in Australia

Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
Phone: +61 2 6277 3540
Fax: +61 2 6277 5719
economics.sen@aph.gov.au

January 2019

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We thank the Senate Standing Committees on Economics for considering this late
submission.
This submission attempts to 1. provide experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities
and unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas;
2. provide CORDS collective view on the causes of inequality between regions,
especially between capital cities and other areas;
3. provide some analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider
impacts and;
4. give examples of solutions as to what has caused some regions or towns to prosper.

ABOUT CORDS

The Council of Regional Disability Services (CORDS) was established in 2004 for people in
leadership roles in regionally-governed disability service providers to share information and
address common challenges. This gives Executives support from their peers and greatly
reduced isolation experienced due to distance.
Currently there are seventeen (17) regional member disability organisations.
CORDS Terms of Reference include:
1. To provide a strong coalition voice for regional organisations working in the disability
field.
2. To provide collegial support to CORDS members.
3. To identify issues and concerns specific to regional service providers.
4. Provide feedback to funders, government and peak disability groups on issues and
concerns as identified by CORDS.
5. To provide an opportunity to act as a regional network of service providers.
6. To advocate for equity of service provision for all people with disability regardless of
geographical location.
7. To have a united voice in presenting ideas, solutions and issues to the broader
sector.
8. To advocate for equity of support, including training, to regional service providers.
9. To promote partnerships and collaboration between regional service providers.

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129

ADDRESSING THE TERMS OF REFERENCE

Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government level
Before the advent of NDIS, the disparate and largely State/Territory-run disability service
systems were “inequitable, underfunded, fragmented, and inefficient and gave people with a
disability little choice. Western Australia’s disability system was however considered the
most advanced and indeed the NDIS was largely modelled on the WA system. Many
disability stakeholders in WA took the view that “if it aint broke don’t fix it” and lobbied
strongly for a WA delivered NDIS.
One in five Australians are believed to have a disability. It is estimated that only 11% of
people with disability will be eligible for the $22 billion per annum (capped) NDIS leaving a
very significant 89% who won’t be.
Although the NDIA accepts stewardship responsibility for the 460,000 Australian’s expected
to be eligible for NDIS funding support, this leaves a considerable gap; who ought to be
responsible for stewardship of those people with a disability who need supports but do not
meet NDIS eligibility criteria? The fiscal challenges for both Commonwealth and State
governments are very significant.
Indeed there are community concerns around the sustainability and adequacy of the NDIS
funding model into the future. CORDS share this concern.
The existing regional pricing frameworks should be refined to ensure they reflect the true
cost of service provision across the nine regional development areas of WA, such as the
additional costs associated with travel and employee compensation. This should be
supported by an annual review of the frameworks to ensure that the prices offered are
flexible and contemporary.
Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government
The NDIS is frequently described as the greatest social reform in Australia since the
introduction of Medicare (Productivity Commission 2017).
The primary driver for the NDIS in Australia was the Productivity Commission’s Inquiry
Report into Disability Care and Support, which was finalised and released in 2011.
However, prior to this report being released there was a renewed focus both nationally and
internationally on providing people with disability equality in life, the freedom to make their
own choices, and enabling them to fully participate and be included economically and
socially in their community.
On the 12 December 2017 the WA State Government signed a bilateral agreement with the
Commonwealth to enter the nationally delivered NDIS.
Because of the State’s vastness the NDIA has taken a staged rolled out approach across
regional WA.
The policy lever which is expected to have the greatest impact on service providers and
cause the greatest amount of industry-wide disruption is the Scheme’s person-centred
approach and individualised funding model.

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129

The Chair of the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) recently described the NDIS
as “a start up on steroids”. Moreover the NDIA CEO has stated that a one-size-fits-all NDIS
model “won’t work for regional, rural and remote WA” and yet the NDIA commissioned
McKinsey & Co Independent Pricing Review presented, and largely adopted by the NDIA
Board “…found that there was no clear rationale for maintaining a separate price guide”.
What this essentially means is that WA, and indeed regional WA, should not be considered
any differently to Tasmania, ACT or any other state of territory.
The peak body for the member providers, National Disability Services WA, campaigned
strongly for the introduction of the NDIS in WA and support the goal of quality support and
choice for more Australians living with disability. However, they believe the implementation
of NDIS has been difficult and resulted in serious stress for a significant number of people
living with disability, families and carers, and providers of services.
The issue of ‘Stewardship’ responsibility has been occupying the minds of the Government,
people with disability and the sector for some time now.
Market failure in thin regional markets is real. Where/if some regional and remote
communities are not adequately serviced, there should be in place suitable intervention
strategies and responses, including a provider of last resort.
An analysis by Governance & Strategy Pty Ltd of the NDIS and Quality and Safeguarding
framework demonstrates that they are one-sided with government largely embracing an
approach of ‘all care, no responsibility’, applying standards and compliance regimes on
providers while Government’s implementation of NDIS remains of variable quality.
CORDS concurs with the assessment that across governments, people with disability, their
networks of supports, and providers, all need to care and all need to be responsible.
Building Human Capital
The ‘WA Disability Services Sector Industry Plan’ states that the capacity and capability of
the WA disability sector must be built and enhanced during the transition to the NDIS,
including the sector’s workforce, its regional services provision, and the current capacity and
capability of the sector’s organisations.
Direct and Indirect regional job estimates paint a compelling picture of the impact of the
NDIS on human capital as a result of the NDIS:
Direct & indirect Jobs
Gross Regional Product

2015/16
2,009
$261million

2019/20 (full NDIS roll out)
5,309 (+264%)
$692million (+265%)

The success of the NDIS in regional WA is ultimately dependent on organisations in the
sector having a workforce that is able to adapt and implement the changes brought on by
the Scheme.
Stakeholders within the sector have recognised this, with respondents to the WA Disability
Sector Survey identifying recruiting and retaining a sufficient and capable workforce as the
second most challenging issue for both organisations and the sector as a whole.
The specific workforce issues mentioned by stakeholders during the survey and
consultation processes were broad ranging, covering all aspects of workforce development,
including workforce culture and industrial relations. The most prominent workforce issues
are:

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 129







Workforce culture
Understanding and responding to workforce needs
Workforce attraction and retention
Current pricing and Awards system; and
Local Area Coordinators

Most notably is the fact that the NDIS will not fund staff training and development; a
significant expense for regional providers.
The economy and workforce is vulnerable to global and other external factors. The boom
and bust cycles are frequent and often unpredictable. This reality has unintended
consequences on regional WA that if not managed well created an uneven playing fields
and inequality for this who live, work and invest in regional WA.
Summary
In terms of services provision under the NDIS particularly in regional WA, without support,
individualised funding may not be viable in regional and remote areas where services
provision is costly and unprofitable, and competition levels are thin.
In alignment with the views of the Productivity Commission, stakeholders consider the
provision of NDIS services in regional WA as a key challenge. They cited a range of
inherent and contemporary factors that negatively impacted their ability to provide regional
individualised services, which cater for the support needs of all people with disability.
Stakeholders are in general agreement that the provision of NDIS services in some
regional, rural and remote areas was not an attractive prospect.
Indeed CORDS believes insufficient attention has, to date, been given to the unique
challenges of disability service provision in regional, rural and remote settings. Failure of
the disability provider sector in regional, rural or remote WA will ultimately reflect on the
Commonwealth and state governments and the responsible agencies.

END

Signed for and on behalf of CORDS by Rob Holmes, Chairperson.

Date: 28 January 2019

6

