Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

30 April 2018

Submission to Senate Economics References Committee Inquiry
into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in
Australia

Danielle Wood, John Daley, and Carmela Chivers

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

Summary points
•

Economic activity and total incomes are growing faster in most
capital cities compared to the regions. The economies of
Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide have all grown substantially
faster than regional economies in NSW, Victoria and South
Australia.

•

But differences in economic growth per person between
capital cities and the regions are smaller. And income growth
per person has not been obviously different between capitals
and regions over the past decade.

•

Most of the difference in total economic activity between
capitals and regions results from different rates of population
growth. Population has grown rapidly in capital cities over the
past decade, while remote areas are losing population, or
remain stagnant. Regional centres have drawn population
from surrounding rural villages and towns, but in general are
not growing as fast as capitals.

•

The differences in population growth between capitals and
regions reflect longer-term structural changes in the Australian

Grattan Institute 2018

economy. An increasing proportion of the workforce is
employed in service industries, which cluster in urban areas.
By contrast, the loss of agriculture and manufacturing is most
keenly felt in regional and outer-suburban areas.
•

Governments should not fight the “gravitational” pull of the
cities and major regional centres. Past attempts at intervention
have been expensive and done little to increase regional
growth and productivity.

•

Policy makers should assess regional development projects
on a social-equity basis, rather than on whether they are likely
to drive sustainable economic growth. This may then provoke
an honest conversation about what level of service
governments are prepared to fund in more remote areas,
given the costs of servicing them.

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

1 Introduction
Grattan Institute is an independent think-tank focused on
Australian domestic public policy. We aim to improve policy
outcomes by providing evidence-based analysis of Australia’s
most pressing problems.
We welcome the Senate Economics References Committee
Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in
Australia.
This submission focuses on the causes of inequality between
cities and regions. Many people assume Australia’s regions are
getting a raw deal compared to the big cities. But a careful look at
the data shows that the oft-repeated “tale of two Australias” is a
more nuanced story.
Although people living in the city earn higher incomes, average
income growth in the regions per person has kept pace with the
cities. Other economic indicators do not appear to be materially
different between cities and the rest of Australia.

may be the source of the commonly held view that regional
Australia has been left behind.
Grattan has published two reports and one working paper that
address these issues:
•

Wood et al., 2018. A crisis of trust: The rise of protest
politics in Australia. https://grattan.edu.au/report/a-crisisof-trust/

•

Daley et al., 2017. Regional patterns of Australia’s
economy and population (working paper).
https://grattan.edu.au/report/regional-patterns-ofaustralias-economy-and-population/

•

Daley and Lancy, 2011. Investing in regions: Making a
difference. https://grattan.edu.au/report/investing-inregions-making-a-difference/

What is different is that economic activity is concentrating in cities
as more people settle in the capitals. Population shifts therefore

Grattan Institute 2018

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

2 Economic indicators of regional inequality
Before diagnosing the cause of regional inequality in Australia, it
is necessary to understand its nature.

people in city areas – the size of the pie – also grew faster in
cities than in regional areas.2

City economies are steaming ahead – economic growth is much
higher in our capitals than anywhere else in the country. Citydwellers also earn higher incomes on average than people in the
regions.

2.2

But the regions are not obviously falling behind on other
measures of economic well-being. Income growth per person is
similar between the regions and the cities. Income inequality,
wealth accumulation, and unemployment also do not seem to be
noticeably different between cities and the rest.
2.1

Average incomes are higher in city postcodes, but so is
income inequality

There is a gap in incomes between cities and regions. It is rare for
postcodes less than ten kilometres from the city centre to have
average taxable incomes of less than $40,000, but this is common
in postcodes 100kms or more from the city.3
Most regional areas in NSW, Victoria, Tasmania and southern
Queensland have below-average incomes; this is rare for areas in
the capitals of these states.4

City economies are steaming ahead

Economic output grew faster in most major cities compared to the
regions over the past decade. The economies of Sydney,
Melbourne and Adelaide have all grown substantially faster than
regional areas in those states.1 And total income earned by
1

Western Australia and Queensland bucked this trend because of the mining
boom. SGS Economics and Planning (2016). Australian Cities Accounts 201516. SGS Economics and Planning.
https://www.sgsep.com.au/application/files/9914/8106/1313/GDP_by
_major_capital_city_201516_-_high_res.pdf ; and ABS (2017, State accounts).
Australian National Accounts: National Income, Expenditure and Product, Sep
2017. Cat. 5206.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics.
2 Daley et al. (2017, pp. 8-11).
3 Daley et al. (2017, p. 8). Unless otherwise stated, this submission uses ATO
data on taxable income by postcode rather than Census data, because it
appears to be more robust, with more accurate information for those with high

Grattan Institute 2018

Higher incomes may be contributing to greater income inequality
in city suburbs. Income inequality is highest in postcodes close to
a capital city centre, where inequality is also increasing more
quickly.5

incomes and from regional areas. See Appendix A in Daley et al. 2017 for a
description of our methodology.
4 See https://grattan.edu.au/report/regional-patterns-maps/ for an interactive map
of average income by SA3, and Appendix A in Daley et al. (2017) for a
description of our map methodology.
5 Daley et al. (2017, p. 13). ATO data reports many regional areas as more
unequal than analysis based on the Census. This may be because the ATO data
has much more accurate information about high-income earners. See Biddle, N.
and Francis, M. (2017), What income inequality looks like across
Australia, The Conversation https://theconversation.com/whatincome-inequalitylooks-like-across-australia-80069 for an example of similar analysis using
Census data.

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

2.3

Income growth per person is similar across cities and
regions

Figure 2.1: Average income is higher in inner-city postcodes
Average taxable income per tax filer, 2014-15, $000s, by postcode
160

The income gap between city and regional Australia is not getting
wider. Income growth per person has been similar across city and
regional areas over recent years.

140

120

Some remote areas have experienced very strong income growth
(Figure 2.2), mostly in mining areas in Western Australia and
Queensland. But this is not just a mining-state phenomenon:
average income growth rates have been similar between the city
and regions in every state between 2003 and 2015.6

100
80
60

Differences in economic growth per person between the cities and
the regions are also much smaller than the absolute gap.7

40

2.4

20

People in regional areas have been accumulating
wealth at a similar rate to people in the cities

People in regional areas on average have also accumulated
wealth at a similar rate to their city cousins. Net worth and
housing values increased slightly more in remote and outer
regional areas compared to city and inner regional areas.8 This
partly captures the strong growth in house prices in remote mining
areas during the boom, as well as growth in prices in outer
regional coastal towns. Growth in city prices has probably been
more consistent than in the regions. And prices in some regional
areas are now declining.9

6

See Appendix B in Daley et al. (2017).
SGS Economics and Planning (2016) and ABS (2017, State accounts).
8 Wood et al. (2018, p. 43).
7

Grattan Institute 2018

0
1

10
100
Distance to GPO, km

1000

Sources: ATO (2017) Taxation Statistics 2014-15, Table 8; Grattan analysis

9

Lutton, E. (2017). The long-suffering Qld towns that could be the next property
hotspots, Domain https://www.domain.com.au/news/the-longsuffering-qld-townsthatcould-be-the-next-property-hotspots-20170817-gxx820/.

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

But over 15 years the price of regional housing has increased
(relative to incomes) in similar ways to the price of capital city
housing.10

Figure 2.2: Income growth has been similar in cities and regions
Annual growth in real taxable income per tax filer, 2003-04 to 2014-15,
by postcode
10%

2.5

Unemployment is not obviously worse in the regions

Unemployment is not definitively worse in regional Australia.
Some regional areas have low levels of unemployment – such as
south-east NSW and western Victoria. Others, such as Far North
Queensland and remote parts of the Northern Territory, have very
high levels of unemployment.11 Unemployment in the cities is
similarly patchy.12
Unemployment did not get markedly better or worse in regions as
opposed to cities between 2011 and 2016.13

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%
1

10
100
1000
Distance to GPO, km
Notes: The growth rate is calculated as the compound annual growth rate
(CAGR) in income per tax filer 2003-04 to 2014-15. A small number of outliers
have been excluded to make the chart more readable.
Sources: ATO (2017) Taxation Statistics 2014-15, Table 8; Grattan analysis

10

Daley et al. (2018, Figure 2.4). Housing affordability: re-imagining the
Australian dream https://grattan.edu.au/report/housing-affordabilityre-imaginingthe-australian-dream/.
11 Daley et al. (2017, p. 16).

Grattan Institute 2018

12

See https://grattan.edu.au/report/regional-patterns-maps/ for an interactive
map of unemployment by SA2.
13 Daley et al. (2017, p. 18).

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

3 Population shifts drive regional inequality
Population shifts are driving a wedge between city and regional
Australia. Economic activity has become more concentrated in
urban areas as people increasingly choose to live in cities.
3.1

Figure 3.1: Population growth is highest in the capitals, some
regional centres, and mining areas

Australia is highly urbanised, and becoming more so

Australia is a highly urbanised country: the most densely
populated parts of the country house 80 per cent of the population
but occupy less than 1 per cent of the land mass.14
And urbanisation is increasing. Population in the capital cities –
particularly the inner cities and the city fringes – grew more than
1.5 per cent a year on average between 2006 and 2016.15 In
contrast, populations of suburbs more than 100 km from a major
city barely increased.16 Even this hides a regional dynamic: major
regional centres grew, while many of the surrounding regions and
smaller towns lost population.17
The growth of city populations relative to the rest has the effect of
concentrating economic activity in urban areas. Relative levels of
population growth explain why city economies have been growing
faster than regional economies, while incomes and economic
growth per person have been similar in cities and regions.

Source: ABS (2017), Census of Population and Housing, Tine Series profiles 2006-2016.

14

16

15

17

Daley et al. (2017, p. 20).
Grattan analysis of ABS (2017). Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2016.
Cat. 3218.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics; see also Daley et al. (2017).

Grattan Institute 2018

Daley et al. (2017, p. 20).
Daley et al. (2017, p. 23); PC (2017).

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

4 Implications of regional inequality

proportion of young people, immigrants and people with a tertiary
education than regional areas.19

Policy makers should work with, not against, the forces shifting
Australia’s economic geography. Governments can’t push
economic water uphill. But they can smooth the transition by
ensuring our regions have access to good-quality services and
that our cities are flexible enough to cope with growing
numbers of people and activity.

4.2

4.1

A 2011 Grattan Institute report showed Australian governments
planned to spend more than $2 billion a year on explicit programs
to promote regional growth. The report found that many regional
development programs – such as local job-attraction schemes,
regional universities, small roads and major infrastructure – did
not materially accelerate growth in slow-growing regions.21

Population shifts reflect structural changes in
Australia's economy

Differences in population growth between cities and regions
reflect longer-term structural changes in the Australian economy.
As in other developed economies, an increasing proportion of
Australia’s workforce is employed in service industries. Over 50
years, employment in services has risen from 5-in-10 workers to
8-in-10 workers.18

Governments should not try to fight the “gravitational”
pull of the cities and major regional centres

Policy makers should not try to reallocate activity to slowergrowing areas. Past attempts at intervention have been expensive
and done little to increase regional growth and productivity.20

4.3

Extra spending on infrastructure and services should
be based on need

Services jobs, particularly in professional services, tend to cluster
in cities and their centres. This is because there are big benefits
to ‘agglomeration’ – being close to lots of other service firms.
These services jobs attract people both from overseas and within
Australia who are younger and more educated than the general
population. So it is not surprising that cities have a higher

Ideally, extra funding to increase the level of services and
infrastructure in an area should be tied to population growth, as
this is a good proxy for the level of capital expenditure required to
keep up with community needs.22

18

21

Withers, G., Endres, T. and Perry, L. (1985). Australian Historical Statistics: Labour
Statistics, Source Papers in Economic History, Source Paper No.
https://www.rse.anu.edu.au/media/118715/SP07_001_Contents.
pdf; ABS (2017). Labour Force, Australia, Detailed, Quarterly, May 2017. Cat.
6291.0.55.003.
19
20

Daley et al. (2017).
Daley and Lancy (2011).

Grattan Institute 2018

Daley and Lancy (2011).
Static populations may need some extra capital funding in addition to regular
funding for maintenance and recurrent services if the age structure of the
population changes, or to keep up with community expectations. See Daley and
Lancy (2011, p. 42).
22

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

Fast-growing regional centres should get help to accommodate
new arrivals. But smaller and slower-growing parts of rural and
regional Australia should not be left without services such as
schools, hospitals, transport and other community facilities.
Spending per person on services already tends to be significantly
higher in regional areas. The costs of providing services –
particularly health, education and policing – are higher with more
dispersed populations, so governments spend more to ensure
that service quality in regional areas doesn’t fall too far behind
service quality in cities (Figure 4.1).
This additional spending per person may well be justified given a
desire to promote national unity, partly by delivering roughly
comparable levels of government services to as much of the
Australian community as possible. But even if the numbers
suggest otherwise, many people in regional areas believe that
they do not get a “fair share” of Australia’s resources.23 If
governments do not address this perception, they run the risk of
exacerbating growing cultural divides between cities and
regions.24
But policy makers should recognise that many regional
development programs are in fact subsidies that can only be
justified on social equity grounds rather than because they are
likely to drive sustainable economic growth. This may then
provoke an honest conversation about what level of service
governments are prepared to fund in more remote areas, given
the costs of servicing them. At times, government spending does
not appear to be well targeted – for instance, transport spending
23
24

Brett (2011). Fair Share: Country and city in Australia. Quarterly Essay No. 42.
Wood et al. (2018, pp. 61-5).

Grattan Institute 2018

was not even remotely linked to growth in the economy or
population in the past 15 years (Figure 4.2).
4.4

Understanding the nature of the regional-city divide is
key

The idea that regional areas have been “left behind” by big cities
is widespread, and politically potent.25 Although there is some
truth to the sentiment, it’s important to recognise the nuance
behind the concern.
Firstly, the aggregate trends in economic growth don’t capture the
significant population shifts that are occurring within regional
Australia and between cities and the rest. For instance, even
though total incomes have grown fastest in cities, average income
per person has kept pace in the regions.
Secondly, the division between regional and city Australia
conceals significant variation between regions and within cities –
as is the case for unemployment rates, which are very high in
some regional areas but low in others.
Policy makers should therefore focus on identifying the differing
needs of city and regional communities. And they should
recognise that regional inequity is driven primarily by population
shifts which reflect large structural shifts to Australia’s economic
geography.
It is not possible to push economic water uphill, but there are
things governments can do to ease the transition.
25

Wood et al. (2018).

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

Figure 4.1: Costs of providing many government services are
higher in the regions
Average per capita spend by state governments by category and
location 2013-14, $
3,500

Major cities
Inner regional
Outer regional
Remote
Very Remote

3,000
2,500

Figure 4.2: Government transport spending has not targeted
growth in economy or population
Size and transport infrastructure spending; % of Australian total
Size
% of national
economy
% of population
growth

20%

10%

% of road & rail
investment

0%
Sydney Melbourne Brisbane

2,000

Adelaide

Perth

30%

State
C’wealth

1,500
20%

1,000
10%

500

0%
0
Schools

Health

Housing

Welfare

Justice

Notes: Differences are those attributed by the CGC to remoteness rather than sociodemographic composition. For example, the impact of larger Indigenous populations in
remote areas has been excluded from this impact. Chart excludes post-secondary
education and services to communities because these categories accounts for relatively
low amounts of state government spending. There is very little variation between spending
in most regions in these categories.
Source: Commonwealth Grants Commission (2015), Report on Sharing GST Relativities
2015 Review, p.84.
https://cgc.gov.au/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=219&Itemid=318

Grattan Institute 2018

Rest of
NSW

Rest of
VIC

Rest of
QLD

Rest of
SA

Rest of
WA

Notes: Percentage size of national economy is for 2014-15; percentage of population
growth is for 2004-14; percent of road and rail investment is for 2006-2015.
Source: Terrill et al. (2016). Roads to Riches: better transport investment, Grattan Institute.
https://grattan.edu.au/report/roads-to-riches/

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 13

Grattan Institute Submission – Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia

For any queries, please contact:
Danielle Wood
Program Director, Budget Policy and Institutional Reform
Grattan Institute

Grattan Institute 2018

9

