Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 14

GK: JC

30 April 2018
Committee Secretary
Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Mark
Thank you for your invitation to make a submission to the ‘Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of,
Regional Inequality in Australia’ inquiry.
Following is Council’s submission:
TRANSPORT






Road Funding for all state roads that improve economic viability, communication and
lifestyle. Industry and Tourism need good roads to connect our many wonderful outback
Queensland attractions
Greater priorities given to road projects west of the great divide range
The Commonwealth changes to the method of funding road damage under the NDRRA has
been greatly welcomed throughout Queensland as it now allows Council day labour
workforce and plant to be used for restoration works. This same approach should be
adopted more widely for federally funded road works where Council can demonstrate value
for money in delivering road construction. Flinders Shire Council is full accredited to
undertake Federal road works over $4M in value. Where this is the case Council should be
offered “Sole Invitee Status” as a right without having to compete in the open market for
such works

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT FUNDING





Commonwealth Financial Assistance to Local Government – A detailed review of the
National Principles governing the distribution of the Commonwealth Financial Assistance
Grants is required. A copy of the resolution #3 adopted at the ALGA conference 2017 is
attached
The Commonwealth’s grant programs need to be reviewed to ensure that the guidelines
reflect conditions in remote areas for example the Regional Growth Fund will provide grants
of $10M or more for major transformational projects which support long term economic
growth. However for remote areas the $10M benchmark may be to high and therefore
projects promoting economic growth and creating jobs would be ineligible

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 14





Commonwealth Drought Support programs over recent years have had a very significant
impact on helping community organisations and Council to continue to provide services. The
Australian Government should continue to play a vital role in this regard to help maintain
community life and infrastructure through drought times
Flinders Shire Council has been undertaking significant economic development projects such
as attracting a Beef Processing Plant to its area and developing a high value irrigated
agricultural project. Currently there is no government support either at the Commonwealth
or State level to Council for the preliminary costs that Council has to incur before private
investors can be attracted. This area of funding also needs to be considered

HEALTH





Requirements for rural and remote areas is more opportunity for funding and telehealth,
more mobile health vans such as Heart of Australia to provide specialist services on a
rotational basis to many rural communities
The Commonwealth Community Care Programs, changes in the delivery model to a user pay
system has had significant implications for Flinders Shire Council who has been the provider
of these services for many years. Changes in the guidelines has meant that previously
authorised program expenditure is no longer eligible (for example traveling cost, which rate
payers are now currently subsidising these costs), this is not sustainable into the future and
a review of how Commonwealth Health Care Products in rural and remote area has become
urgent)
The MPHS is federally funded for the beds in existing health facilities. The beds are taken off
the existing beds in the facilities and as such they can be private rooms, verandas, acute
beds in wards or walled off hallways. The areas have no recreational areas or kitchenette
facilities and need to share toilets and bathrooms with hospital patients. Consideration
needs to be given for the provision of funding to supply purpose built bedrooms for aged
patients who qualify as MPHS clients. We would like to see purpose built modular units
attached to the existing hospitals and health centres so that these MPHS clients can live out
their final time in a positive, comfortable environment.
Most rural and regional towns have an ageing population and consideration needs to be
given to aged Care accommodation and secure Dementia units. There is no such facility on
the Flinders Highway between Charters Towers and Cloncurry in the townships of
Hughenden, Richmond and Julia Creek. These facilities could also be supplied by way of
specifically built modular units that can be attached to existing facilities.

COMMUNICATION



NBN has not filled the gap for communication requirements, many smaller companies are
filling the gap and this does not cover all areas, there needs to be a much better
communication system that brings rural and remote areas into the 21st century. A review by
Telstra is also considered necessary into the time taken to fixed land line services

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 14

TOURISM



The economic benefits of tourism to remote communities are very significant. The Australian
Government needs to become directly involved in funding the development and or
improvement of tourism product. Council is not aware of any funding opportunities to assist
Council’s in tourism development

EDUCATION



The delivery of education services in remote areas needs review to ensure that students
particularly in the later stage on secondary education are not disadvantaged compared to
their urban counterparts. It is noticed that senior students struggle to complete senior
subjects required for University entrance as these subjects are largely only offered via the
internet and in some cases not offered at all, this is creating a second class system for the
deliver of education services.

COMMERCIAL



Banking opportunities. The four big banks have been progressively pulling their services out
of the bush, we need to have access to smaller banks to cover the needs of financial viability
of our business and private sectors

RENEWABLE ENERGY



Major projects such as the Copper String Project should receive greater funding and priority
to improve energy requirements in rural and remote areas of Queensland

AIR TRANSPORT



The cost of airfares in remote areas is becoming a significant issue for residents in these
remote areas. There is current Senate enquiry into this issue and Council supports ways of
making airfares more affordable to ensure that this is not another incentive for people to
relocate out of remote areas of the state.

POPULATION DECLINE



Outback Queensland represents some 60% of the state and has approximately 2% of the
states population. Recent Census data indicates that many communities within outback
Queensland are reducing in population, including Flinders Shire. It is becoming crucial that
both the state and Australian Governments address the declining population and conduct a
review of its policies and programs to ensure there is positive action taken.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 14

Yours faithfully

Graham King
Chief Executive Officer

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 14

