Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

The Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia: A
Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee, Parliament
of Australia
Dr Gerald Onsando
Dr Gerald Onsando has conducted research and published widely about resettlement of culturally
diverse communities in Australia. Dr Onsando managed one of the first Australian empirical
longitudinal research project that compared resettlement outcomes between a cohort of culturally
1 2
diverse migrants living in urban and regional areas.

1. Executive summary
Issues

of

regional

inequality

in

Australia

cannot

be

fully

addressed

without

acknowledging the significant socioeconomic benefits culturally diverse migrants bring
into these areas. However, these migrants face many challenges when resettling in
regional Australia.
This submission has responded to Terms of Reference a) fiscal policies at federal, state
and local government levels (section 3); b) improved co-ordination of federal, state and
local government policies (section 4); e) education (section 5); f) building human
capital; g) enhancing local workforce skills; and h) employment arrangements (section
6). In summary, this submission recommends the following:


1: The federal government review its fiscal policies in relation to funding at local
government level to better support resettlement of culturally diverse communities in
regional Australia.



2: Guided by the National Settlement Framework, federal, state and local
government improve co-ordination of their resettlement policies in regional Australia
with increased recognition of the important role that local governments play.



3: Educational institutions be better supported and adequately resourced to improve
educational outcomes for culturally diverse communities living in regional Australia.



4: Local governments in regional Australia be adequately resourced to build human
capital and create meaningful employment opportunities for culturally diverse
migrants.

2. Culturally diverse migrants and regional Australia
The latest Census of Population and Housing3 statistics showed that 26 per cent
(6,163,667 people) of Australia’s population (23,401,892 people) were born overseas.
1

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2009, ‘Educational and Occupational Outcomes Amongst African Men from
Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast Queensland’, The Australasian Review of African
Studies, 30(2), pp.114-127.
2

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2013, ‘Longitudinal Evidence on Educational and Occupational Outcomes
Amongst South Sudanese Men from Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast
Queensland’. In South Sudanese Diaspora in Australia and New Zealand: Reconciling the Past with the Present
(pp. 129-143). Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
3

Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2017, ‘Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from
the Census, 2016 - Cultural diversity in Australia’ (cat. no. 2071.0). Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra,
ACT.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

Page 2 of 6

The population of culturally diverse migrants most of whom were born overseas is
growing, including in many regional areas of Australia. This submission therefore focuses
on regional inequality in Australia from a culturally diverse migrant perspective. Here,
the term ‘regional’ refers to all towns, small cities and areas that lie beyond the major
capital cities of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, and Canberra.4 Most of
the essential infrastructure and services are concentrated in these major capital cities.
For these reasons many Australians, including migrants, prefer living in major cities
therefore adding to environmental and service delivery pressures on cities.
The availability of basic infrastructure and appropriate services, for example nearby
educational institutions, health facilities, affordable housing, are important factors that
attract and retain migrants in regional areas. 5 While availability of basic infrastructure
and services is an important factor for everyone living in regional areas, culturally
diverse communities may have specific needs that would assist their resettlement. For
example, some new migrants may need English language support services while others
may require specialised health services. Provision of these essential services requires
effective fiscal policies and enhanced co-ordination at federal, state, and local
government levels.
3. Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels
Successful migrant resettlement in regional Australia depends on the effectiveness of
fiscal policies at federal, state, and local government levels. However, some federal fiscal
policies like cost shifting6

7

have adversely affected local governments’ capacity to

provide essential services to communities. Local governments (also known as local
councils) need to be adequately funded through progressive federal and state fiscal
policies because the councils play a critical role in migrant resettlement processes.
A recent joint Treasury-Home Affairs analysis reported that migrants bring significant
socioeconomic benefits to Australia.8 The Guide to Supporting Settlement in Regional
Australia report9 described the extensive positive effects of migration on the economy,
particularly regional Australia economies. Culturally diverse migrants add to regional
economic activities by:


increasing demand for products and services



bringing in new skills, knowledge, capital investment



offering innovative work and business practices

4

Regional Australia Institute, 2017, ‘What is Regional Australia?’,
<http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/what-is-regional-australia/>.

accessed

28

March

2018,

5

Department of Immigration and Border Protection, 2014, ‘Regional Retention of Migrants: Critical Success
Factors’, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT.
6

The Local Government NSW describes ‘cost shifting’ as a situation where the responsibility and costs of
providing services are 'shifted' from a higher level of government on to a lower level of government without
providing corresponding funding.
7

Municipal Association of Victoria, 2017, ‘Federal Budget Restores Vital Grants Indexation’, accessed 28 March
2018, <http://www.mav.asn.au/news/Pages/federal-budget-restores-vital-grants-indexation-10may17.aspx>.
8

The Treasury and The Department of Home Affairs, 2018, ‘Shaping a Nation: Population Growth and
Immigration Over Time’, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT.
9

Department of Social Services, 2017, ‘Guide to Supporting Settlement in Regional Australia’, Commonwealth
of Australia, Canberra, ACT.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

Page 3 of 6



socially strengthening local communities



contributing to increases in production and improvements in productivity.

For these reasons, fiscal policies developed at federal, state, and local government levels
should be reviewed to prioritise better support for culturally diverse communities
resettling in regional Australia.


Recommendation 1: The federal government review its fiscal policies in relation to
funding at local government level to better support resettlement of culturally diverse
communities in regional Australia.

4. Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies is critical in
ensuring that communities in regional Australia to enjoy socioeconomic growth. The
National

Settlement

Framework 10

recommends

that

the

responsibility

for

the

resettlement of newly arrived migrants in Australia be shared between the federal, state,
and local governments. New migrants, need to feel socially secure with a sense of
belonging to society11 therefore local governments should be adequately consulted and
funded for the important task of resettling culturally diverse communities in regional
Australia.12 Lack of effective co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
adversely affects implementation of projects that are meant to assist resettlement of
culturally diverse communities in regional areas.
For many culturally diverse migrants, having access to suitable affordable housing,
attending English language tuition classes, and having a supportive family in an inclusive
society is important to their resettlement in regional Australia.13 Indeed, family
connections and social networks play a very important role in attracting and retaining
culturally diverse communities in regional areas.14 These connections assist new
migrants in socialising, seeking employment as well as engaging in other socioeconomic
activities in regional areas. Federal, state, and local government policies should consider
allocating adequate funding that offer opportunities for culturally diverse communities to
achieve family and social connections in regional Australia.


Recommendation 2: Guided by the National Settlement Framework, federal, state
and local government improve co-ordination of their resettlement policies in regional
Australia with increased recognition of the important role that local governments
play.

10

The National Settlement Framework is a high level structural blueprint for Commonwealth, State and
Territory and Local Government, to work in partnership to effectively plan and deliver services that support the
settlement of migrants and new arrivals in Australia.
11

Department of Immigration and Border Protection, 2014, ‘Regional Retention of Migrants: Critical Success
Factors’, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT.
12

Boese, M. and Phillips, M., 2017, ‘The Role of Local Government in Migrant and Refugee Settlement in
Regional and Rural Australia’, Australian Journal of Social Issues, 52(4), pp.388-404.
13

Regional Australia Institute, 2016, ‘Talking Point: The Missing Migrants’, Regional Australia Institute, Barton,
ACT.
14

Department of Immigration and Border Protection, 2014, ‘Regional Retention of Migrants: Critical Success
Factors’, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

Page 4 of 6

5. Improving educational outcomes
The lack of adequate infrastructure and services in regional areas often means that
residents must travel long distances to get to educational institutions. Additionally, the
expense associated with recruiting and retaining quality educators and other staff in
regional Australia requires significant financial and time resources. 15 The Correa-Velez
and Onsando study16

17

analysed educational outcomes of culturally diverse migrant

participants based on place of resettlement. Compared to participants living in a
metropolitan city, participants resettling in regional areas were:


significantly less likely to have completed an overseas college, trade or university
degree



more likely to be attending a college, trade or a university course in Australia



significantly more likely to have had mostly negative educational experiences while
studying in Australia.

Similarly, Joyce and Liamputtong18 identified difficulties of accessing further education as
one of the acculturation stress for young migrants living in regional areas. This is an
indication that, despite facing significant challenges, culturally diverse communities in
regional areas are keen to improve their educational outcomes. It is therefore necessary
to support and adequately resource learning institutions that cater for culturally diverse
communities in regional Australia.


Recommendation 3: Educational institutions be better supported and adequately
resourced to improve educational outcomes for culturally diverse communities living
in regional Australia.

6. Building human capital and creating employment opportunities
Several small towns in regional areas are struggling to attract and retain the workforce
they need to support their local economy and sustain communities. Migrants offer many
advantages to growing regional communities and those at risk of population decline by
contributing to regional economies, stabilising population size, and helping to socially
strengthen local communities.19 Communities from culturally diverse backgrounds
however require dedicated support from the local host community to assist them in
developing social networks and connections in regional areas. This will increase human

15

Independent Schools Council of Australia, 2017, ‘Independent Review into Regional, Rural, and Remote
Education’, accessed 28 March 2018, <http://isca.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-08-29-ISCAsubmission-Rural-Regional-Remote-Education.pdf>.
16

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2009, ‘Educational and Occupational Outcomes Amongst African Men from
Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast Queensland’, The Australasian Review of African
Studies, 30(2), pp.114-127.
17

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2013, ‘Longitudinal Evidence on Educational and Occupational Outcomes
Amongst South Sudanese Men from Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast
Queensland’. In South Sudanese Diaspora in Australia and New Zealand: Reconciling the Past with the Present
(pp. 129-143). Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
18

Joyce, L. and Liamputtong, P., 2017, ‘Acculturation Stress and Social Support for Young Refugees in Regional
Areas’, Children and Youth Services Review, 77, pp.18-26.
19

Regional Australia Institute, 2016, ‘Talking Point: The Missing Migrants’, Regional Australia Institute, Barton,
ACT.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

Page 5 of 6

capital in regional areas and can be achieved through social programs and activities
organised by local governments.
Meaningful employment should meet an individual’s occupational and socioeconomic
needs and is a key enabler of participation in society. However, many individuals from
culturally diverse communities are often unemployed or find employment in low-skilled,
low-status jobs.20

21

The Correa-Velez and Onsando study22

23

assessed employment

outcomes of culturally diverse migrant participants based on place of resettlement.
Compared to participants living in a metropolitan city, participants resettling in regional
areas:


were significantly more likely to be underemployed



were more dissatisfied with their employment



had experienced more serious difficulties finding work in Australia



had experienced more discrimination while finding work or working in Australia



were less likely to have their previous qualifications recognised in Australia.

Furthermore, according to Joyce and Liamputtong,24 young migrants in regional areas
lacked opportunities to secure satisfying employment. This is an indication that,
culturally diverse migrants in regional Australia face significant employment challenges
that can only be addressed by having meaningful employment. It is evident that having
meaningful employment is critical to the successful attraction and retention of culturally
diverse workers in regional areas of Australia.25
The Victorian regional township of Nhill is a good example of successful regional
resettlement of culturally diverse migrants. The township of Nhill offered worthwhile
employment opportunities to migrants which resulted in significant socioeconomic
benefits for the migrants and the broader community.26 Other examples of relatively
successful regional resettlement for cultural diverse communities include Sunraysia in
regional Victoria and New South Wales (see Case Study 1, Appendix) and the Shire of
Dalwallinu in regional Western Australia (see Case Study 2, Appendix).

20

Kosny, A., Santos, I. and Reid, A., 2017. ‘Employment in a “Land of Opportunity?” Immigrants’ Experiences
of Racism and Discrimination in the Australian Workplace’, Journal of International Migration and Integration,
18(2), pp.483-497.
21

Ressia, S., Strachan, G. and Bailey, J., 2017. ‘Going Up or Going Down? Occupational Mobility of Skilled
Migrants in Australia’, Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 55(1), pp.64-85.
22

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2009, ‘Educational and Occupational Outcomes Amongst African Men from
Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast Queensland’, The Australasian Review of African
Studies, 30(2), pp.114-127.
23

Correa-Velez, I. and Onsando, G., 2013, ‘Longitudinal Evidence on Educational and Occupational Outcomes
Amongst South Sudanese Men from Refugee Backgrounds Living in Urban and Regional Southeast
Queensland’. In South Sudanese Diaspora in Australia and New Zealand: Reconciling the Past with the Present
(pp. 129-143). Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
24

Joyce, L. and Liamputtong, P., 2017, ‘Acculturation Stress and Social Support for Young Refugees in Regional
Areas’, Children and Youth Services Review, 77, pp.18-26.
25

Department of Immigration and Border Protection, 2014, ‘Regional Retention of Migrants: Critical Success
Factors’, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, ACT.
26

AMES Australia and Deloitte Access Economics, 2015, ‘Small Towns Big Returns: Economic and Social Impact
of the Karen Resettlement in Nhill’, AMES Research and Policy and Deloitte Access Economics, Melbourne, VIC.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 15

Page 6 of 6



Recommendation 4: Local governments in regional Australia be adequately
resourced to build human capital and create meaningful employment opportunities
for culturally diverse migrants.

7. Appendix
Case Study 1: Sunraysia, Victoria and New South Wales27
This resettlement initiative involves Burundian immigrants who were engaged in
horticultural activities in the Sunraysia region located in north western Victoria and south
western New South Wales. The resettlement project was supported by the Sunraysia
Mallee Ethnic Community Council who assisted Burundian immigrants acquire blocks of
land for farming and settlement. The new migrants introduced their indigenous farming
practices and foods and shared their agricultural knowledge with local farmers. The
regional settlement of the Burundian migrants in Sunraysia was deemed a success
because many were actively involved in productive farming activities and reported being
happier compared to when they were living in cities like Melbourne and Sydney.
Case Study 2: Dalwallinu, Western Australia28
The Shire of Dalwallinu in regional Western Australia was once facing decline because of
underutilisation of infrastructure and a declining population. The community reversed
this decline in just a few years through the Regional Repopulation Pilot Project that
involved initiatives such as the running of English classes and hosting various community
events to support culturally diverse communities. In this initiative, approximately 200
new culturally diverse residents moved to live and work in the area contributing to the
population and socioeconomic growth of the Shire of Dalwallinu.

27

University of Wollongong, 2018, ‘A Garden to Call Home: The Story of an Empty Block, a Team of
Researchers, and a Community of Farmers in Search of a Farm.’, accessed 28 March 2018,
<http://stand.uow.edu.au/a-garden-to-call-home/>.
28

Regional Australia Institute, 2016, ‘Talking Point: The Missing Migrants’, Regional Australia Institute, Barton,
ACT.

