Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 21

30 April 2018

Dear Sir/Madam
Destination North Coast NSW would like to make a submission to the Senate inquiry into
the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Destination North Coast is one of six regional tourism entities that have been established to
drive the growth of the visitor economy in Regional NSW. Based in Lismore, as the lead
tourism agency, Destination North Coast oversees tourism development and management
in the region from Mid-Coast to Tweed Heads including Lord Howe Island.
Importance of the Visitor Economy to the North Coast
The tourism industry contributed an estimated $2.8 billion to the North Coast regional
economy in 2015/16 accounting for 12% of the North Coast’s gross regional product. The
industry directly employed 20,700 people, with further 7,900 indirect jobs created –
accounting for a combined 11.6% of the workforce in the region. Cafes, restaurants and
takeaway food services (31.3%) accounted for the highest portion of jobs generated,
followed by retail trade (22.1%), and accommodation (16.5%)1. The North Coast has an
estimated 6,904 tourism businesses, 96% of these have less than 20 employees2. The
intrastate market was the most significant contributor to Gross Regional Product, with the
interstate market and international market also important (see Table 1).
Table 1: Visitor origin and contribution to GRP, North Coast
Visitor Segment
Gross Regional Product
$ million
Day-trippers
187
Intrastate
625
Interstate
464
International
267
Direct
1,544
Indirect
1,304
TOTAL IMPACT
2,848
Source: North Coast Tourism Satellite Accounts 2015-16, Deloitte Access Economics, 2017

1 North Coast Tourism Satellite Accounts 2015-16, Deloitte Access Economics, 2017.
2 Tourism Region Profile 2015, Tourism Research Australia

ACN 617 918 037

|

PO Box 146 LISMORE NSW 2480

|

info@dncnsw.com

Contribution
(%)
12.1
40.5
30.1
17.3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 21

The North Coast is Australia’s third largest tourism region based on domestic visitor nights,
behind only Sydney and Melbourne and ahead of Brisbane, Gold Coast, Perth and the
Sunshine Coast.
Key Issues
Destination North Coast has recently completed its 2018-2021 Destination Management
Plan for the region. During the consultation process, a number of issues were identified as
impacting the potential to further develop the visitor economy on the North Coast - we
believe are directly relevant to this inquiry.







Lack or research at a regional level
Career pathways in tourism
Attracting tourism investment
Infrastructure
Funding for local government
Improved rail access

Research
Destinations and regions that have established research and data collection systems to
support tourism planning and decision-making are better able to plan effectively and adapt
to changing market trends and circumstances and attract inward investment.
Tourism Research Australia (TRA) provides a resource of visitor data that enables tourism
stakeholders to evaluate a consistent visitation data set over time. However, at a regional or
LGA level due to limited sample size, this data may not exist or may not be reliable. In
addition, with occupancy data for commercial accommodation, reporting is limited to
properties with 15 or more rooms which often misses the smaller properties more prevalent
in regional Australia. As this data collection has now been outsourced from the Australian
Bureau of Statistics to a private company STR, potentially the number of regional properties
included in the sample has reduced further. In the North Coast region, there are only 32
properties included in the sample – this does not even provide reliable data for major
tourism centers such as Coffs Harbor.
Solution: A review of data collection by the Federal Government to ensure there is better
information at a regional level. New technologies may enable improved data to be collected
in a cost-effective manner that can help support improved planning and investment
attraction.
Career Pathways in Tourism
The tourism industry is a significant employer across region Australia and tends to be a high
employer of youth and women. Despite strong demand from employers and relatively high
unemployment in the North Coast of NSW, there appears to be disconnect with businesses
often struggling to find local youth with the appropriate skills and sometimes relying on
working holiday makers to fill the gap. Issues include the lack of foundation skills such as
communication skills amongst school and TAFE leavers, a disconnect between industry and
educational institutions and a perception that the tourism and hospitality industry does not

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 21

provide solid career pathways. The fragmented nature of the tourism industry also results
in a lack of recognised career paths. For example, students often associate career paths in
tourism being restricted to the hospitality sector.
Solutions: (1) Initiate a national marketing campaign to raise the profile of the tourism
industry emphasising the many and varied job opportunities including work in both the
public and private sector. (2) AusIndustry assess gaps and provide training/industry support
as required.
Investment Attraction
New public and private sector tourism investment can have a catalytic impact on the
destination and can also help with knowledge transfer and improved market access. An
issue identified through our destination management planning process was that while there
is often State or Federal funding for capital works programs, it often difficult for local
governments or other interested parties to access funding for feasibility studies or master
plans.
Solution: Future Federal Government funding programs to include funding for feasibility
studies.
Increase Tourism Funding for Local Councils
Governments at both State and Federal levels should recognise that Local Governments play
a crucial role in tourism management and marketing. Local Governments should be
provided with adequate funding to manage and market tourism. Local councils struggle to
maintain and implement crucial infrastructure for tourism. They have minimal funds for
town beautification, environmental management and essential services like public
transport. The majority of grants available for tourism development often require matching
cash which councils do not have so this excludes them from applying for funding.
Solution: Provide funding to local councils from State and Federal Government based on
economic dynamics of the LGA.
Improve information technology for regional communities
The NBN is a key driver for regional economies but the current NBN roll out that adopts
fibre to the node or curb technology is insufficient for future needs. Government at both
levels should commit to delivering fibre to the premises.
Solution: Provide adequate funding to deliver fibre to the premises for all regional
communities.
Increase cultural infrastructure in regional areas
A major impediment for urban based residents in relocating to regional Australia is the lack
of cultural infrastructure. A lack of cultural infrastructure within regional communities has a
direct impact on attracting skilled workers to country towns.
Solution: Governments at both levels should look at the city based cultural assets like
museums and art galleries and create annexes of these assets in regional locations.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 21

Successive governments need to maintain successful solutions programs.
Quite often, successful programmes and initiatives are terminated with a change of
government. These changes are often based on political reasons rather than economic
rationale. Quite often government programmes are closed only to be re-established some
time later under a different banner. This poses significant cost to the tax payer, it means
the programme loses momentum and it leaves clients confused and frustrated
Solution: An apolitical agency should be established to protect successful industry
programmes.
Implement appropriate social policy to address peaks and toughs in tourism
The tourism industry suffers from peaks and troughs in visitation largely due to school
holiday terms ie. every public school in NSW takes their holidays at the same time
throughout the year.
Solution: Introduce legislation to ensure geographic regions within the state have different
school holiday periods.
Sports Tourism Development
More investment in sports infrastructure in regional communities will stimulate visitation
through expansion of events and introduction of new competition. Sport is a valuable, high
yield market for tourism. It can be developed in regional areas that lack conventional tourist
attractions or that aren’t positioned in appealing destinations.
Solution: Increase funding from both State and Federal Governments into sports
infrastructure.
Stimulate Investment for Inclusive Tourism Development.
There is significant evidence detailing that the inclusive tourism market is largely
undersupplied. Around 17% percent of Australians are recognised as having some form of
disability. Accommodation, tour and attraction operators need to be incentivised to upgrade
their properties and infrastructure to cater to people with disabilities.
Solution: Introduce funding programmes that do not require a matching cash component to
stimulate investment for inclusive tourism
Support Innovation through Design Integration
There is a significant need to educate business operators around the benefits of Design
Integration. Applying creative thinking and design principles can stimulate the retail sector,
enhance street scapes, refresh destinations and create work for creatives from all
disciplines.
Solution: Create a government service that delivers design integration services for regional
business

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 21

Improve Regional Rail Services.
Rail services into regional Australia are slow, expensive and tired.
Solution: Governments should invest in rail infrastructure and rail services to match the
world’s best.
Reduce the cost of fuel to stimulate more travel.
Reducing the cost of petrol and diesel would stimulate all forms of tourism - making travel
much more affordable
Solution: Reduce fuel excise
Introduce innovative tourism signage along our highways
As our road infrastructure improves, travellers are less inclined to stop during their journey.
Innovative road signage needs to be introduced along our highways to appeal to travellers.
This will stimulate more visits to small regional communities
Solution: Invest in innovative tourism road signage
Please feel free to contact me at
information.
Kind regards

Cameron Arnold
Chair

if you require further

