Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 23

Committee Secretary
Economics Reference Committee
Department of the Senate
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA
Email - seniorclerk.committees.sen@aph.gov.au

PO Box 1943
Hervey Bay Qld 4655
T 1300 79 49 29
F (07) 4197 4455
E enquiry@frasercoast.qld.gov.au
www.frasercoast.qld.gov.au

Re: Submission - Inquiry into the Indicators of and impact of regional inequality in Australia
The Fraser Coast Regional Council (Council) welcomes the opportunity to provide a submission to the
Economics Reference Committee into the Indicators of and impact of regional inequality in Australia.
Council administers essential services including roads, water and waste services; and plays a
significant role in the social, economic and cultural development of the community and in improving
local living environments.

Introduction
The Fraser Coast Local Government Area (LGA) is around 7,100 square kilometres and encompasses
World Heritage Listed Fraser Island. The LGA has an estimated resident population of 104,0001 with
an average annual growth rate of 1.0% over 5 years (compared with the Queensland average annual
growth rate of 1.5% over 5 years). The region’s population is dispersed between the main centres of
Maryborough (24,000) and Hervey Bay (57,000) and the 13 small communities of the hinterlands and
coastal regions.
The Fraser Coast Local Government Area has a high socio-economic disadvantage. For example, the
SEIFA Index places 59.4% of the Fraser Coast LGA’s population in the most disadvantaged quintile
compared to 20% for Queensland; the youth unemployment rate in the Wide Bay region is currently
28.4% and Fraser Coast has an unemployed rate in excess of 10% compared with 6.1% for
Queensland; and 41% of the population has the highest level of school of year 11 or 12 education
compared with 48.9% for the Queensland population.
There is a need for an improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies and
programmes and collaboration with community to deliver placed-based solutions to ensure an
holistic approach to address regional disadvantage.
There is an identified lack of equal opportunity to tertiary (especially university) education in
Maryborough and the outlying communities within the Fraser Coast. These regions are especially

1

Population estimates rounded to nearest thousand

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 23

vulnerable with a high prevalence of low socio- economic disadvantage, social isolation and the lack
of easy and affordable regional transport.
In a region where 24% of the population are aged 65 years+ (Qld 15%), an improved co-ordination of
federal, state and local government policies and programmes would provide opportunities to
develop responses in relation to reducing social isolation. People living in the outlying communities
face difficulties with access to services. As stated above, these communities require increased access
to transport and services (eg education and health and wellness services).
It is acknowledged that there are constraints and challenges with delivery of services to regional and
remote communities. Hence, the need to work with communities and seek innovative, place-based
initiatives that respond to issues.
Stacey’s Storey

Example, what is not working?
Systemic issues such as funding and a siloed approach are of primary
concern. There is a lack of consistency and collaboration between
providers and levels of government to address socio-economic
disadvantage, especially in the outlying communities within our region.
Accessibility to specialised health care remains a focus at stakeholder
forums including the Fraser Coast Small Communities Advisory Group
Meetings and the recent Wide Bay Health Service Strategic Planning
Forums. The Fraser Coast Small Communities Advisory Group has
representation from all 13 outlying communities on the Fraser Coast.
Members have reported residents are choosing not to access specialist
healthcare because some can no longer drive or afford to travel to
Brisbane to access the healthcare. Often residents live in the outlying
communities due to the lower cost of housing and rentals. However, the
converse side of this are the issues with access to services and the
increased likelihood of vulnerability and social isolation.
Recently, there has been a marked increase in both state and federal
government programmes focusing on regional skills and employability gaps
to address the high levels of unemployment, especially youth and the longterm unemployed. Both levels of government have the expectation that
local government will be an active partner in promoting and facilitating
delivery of these initiatives. Outlined below is an example of the current
framework that Council is operating in regarding skills and employment
development:




Stacey (name changed for
privacy reasons) is a 21 year
old unemployed indigenous
girl who left school in year 11
and has not been able to
secure employment. Stacey
lives 20 kilometres from
Maryborough.
Stacey failed her learners
permit exam twice and
believes the anxiety attacks
during both exams prevented
her from passing. She now
has a fear of driving. Stacey
has also dropped out of 2
courses because of the fear of
failure.
In 2015 Stacey started
volunteering as a self-care
measure to manage her
depression and anxiety.
However, Stacey has had to
quit, as there are no public
community transport options
available to meet her needs.
The lack of transport also
prevents Stacey attending
regular health appointments
and job active appointments;
this is increasing her social
isolation.

Jobs Queensland – Fraser Coast Workforce Development Plan
Queensland Government Department of Employment, Small
Business and Training – Regional Skills and Investment Strategy
Queensland Government Department of Employment Small Business and Training – Training
Reference Group

-2-

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 23

 Australian Government Department of Employment – Youth Jobs Path Programme
 General collaboration with TAFE, University of Sunshine Coast, and Secondary Schools
 Various programmes administered by the job agency networks
Local governments have extremely limited resources and capacity to effectively partner with all that
is currently being asked. To address this, we are requesting all stakeholders to take a collaborative
approach and develop a coordinated response to the complex needs of the unemployed in our
region. However, it is difficult to bring stakeholders together as they are often constrained by the
funding agreements to deliver specified outputs, have limited resources and capacity or they are not
“in region”.
The ever-increasing reliance on technology for access to and delivery of services is an identified issue,
especially in the rural communities with difficult internet and mobile access.

Examples of solutions
Strategic Collaboration
Council plays an active role in several advisory and provider reference groups across the region to
take a collaborative approach to address some of the issues identified above. These include (but not
limited too):



Jobs Queensland – Fraser Coast Workforce Development Plan (Advisory Group);
Queensland Government Department of Employment Small Business and Training - Training
Reference Group;
 Wide Bay Hospital and Health Services - Community Health Reference Group;
 Queensland Police Services - Fraser Coast Community Policing Board;
 Fraser Coast Small Communities Advisory Group.
 General collaboration with the Community Services and Health Sector on an ongoing Local
Government Area basis (eg Interagency)
 Study Fraser Coast
As outlined above, services tend to work in a siloed approach and are often constrained by systemic
issues. Services also have a lack of capacity and resources to engage at the broader level. To
respond to the complex needs of regional inequality, an holistic co-ordinated and collaborative
approach with a high level of community engagement is paramount.
Fraser Coast Regional Social Plan
In partnership with the Hervey Bay Neighbourhood Centre and Queensland Council of Social Services,
Council is developing the Fraser Coast Regional Social Plan which has been funded through the
Federal Government’s Building Better Regions Fund. This will reflect the demographic and social
issues of the Fraser Coast, and provide strategies to respond to social and locational disadvantage
through an implementation plan which is “owned” by the broader community.
The Community Builders’ Programme
The Community Builders’ Programme is jointly funded under the We are Queensland small grants
programme. Council is working with community to drive community change, learn new ways to build
their community’s capacity and resilience and reduce the isolation in the 13 smaller communities on
the Fraser Coast.

-3-

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 23

A skilled facilitator is delivering intensive workshops over 8 months rotating with participating
communities. Regional community leaders are participating. It is expected that each participant will
gain the skills and support to lead a Community Asset Infrastructure and Social Audit and a
community project unique to their own community’s needs – in essence a Community Plan which is
owned and led by each community and continues to be supported by Council.
Transport
Regional transportation is an identified priority issue which has been brought to the fore by the
Fraser Coast Small Communities Advisory Group. Innovative solutions are currently being sought by
the Fraser Coast and we are looking at what is working in other communities. For example, a small
community in North East Victoria (Tolmie) has developed a Sustainable Transport Group with the
idea of assisting Tolmie residents in accessing a lift to Mansfield and other destinations including
larger regional centres for medical appointments. The scheme called TOAST (Tolmie Officers a Seat
to Town) links residents who have a spare seat in their car with residents who require a lift. The aim
of the scheme is to assist Tolmie residents in an area of identified need and to remove the isolation
that would occur without access to transport.

Proposed Solutions
Opportunities for sharing infrastructure and services (eg tele-health and mobile outreach services)
could improve efficiencies and contribute to the reduction of social isolation. The emphasis on
improving services would be significant and will represent both a psychological and material
enhancement to communities.
Accessible and affordable transport options that improve connectivity and access to services to
outlying communities should be investigated and supported by government and stakeholders. As
outlined above, Council has currently commenced this process through the Social Plan, Community
Builders’ Programme and a focus on partnerships. The focus is to provide co-ordinated and
sustainable responses to social and locational disadvantage and vulnerability.

Summary
A collaborative place-based approach is required rather than a siloed approach delivering short term
outcomes. Structural and systemic changes are required that bring together multiple policy issues
and cross-disciplinary streams.
In collaboration with stakeholders, community, State and Federal Governments, the Fraser Coast
Regional Council is focused on delivering sustainable outcomes which will harness the existing and
emergent opportunities and contribute to Building Better Communities in our region.
Contact Officer:
Phone:
Docs Reference:

Executive Manager Community & Economy - Louise Knol
1300 79 49 29
#3546221

-4-

