Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

SENATE ECONOMICS
REFERENCES COMMITTEE
INQUIRY INTO THE
INDICATORS OF, AND
IMPACT OF, REGIONAL
INEQUALITY OF AUSTRALIA
Queensland Council of Unions Submission
Submission of the Queensland Council of Unions

John Martin
j

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

Introduction
The Queensland Council of Unions (QCU) is the peak union organisation in Queensland. The issue of
regional inequality is a fundamental concern to the QCU. Members of QCU affiliates that will live that
disadvantage in the regional areas. This submission commences with a brief discussion of disadvantage
in the labour market, particularly within a regional setting. It then follows on with a discussion of the
nature of Queensland and graphically illustrates problems with employment growth and unemployment
in regional centres. Given the significance of mining to the Queensland economy there is discussion
on that industry’s importance and the deleterious impacts of Fly-in Fly-out (FIFO) workforces. The
submission concludes with discussion of QCU policy as it has been articulated in recent elections.

The nature of disadvantage
Disadvantage take many forms, however, the primary concern for the QCU in this submission is that of
disadvantage within the labour market. The inability to earn sufficient income leads to a full range of
other social deprivations. Disadvantage in the labour market, particularly that caused by geographic
location is also closely linked with an absence of services at a community level. Unemployment
remains stubbornly at around the five to six per cent level and this is despite reasonable economic
growth (Healy 2016). This persistent level of unemployment is largely driven by youth unemployment.
At 12.5 per cent in 2016, the level of unemployment for 15 to 24-year-olds is twice that of any other
age group (Oliver and Yu 2017). Youth unemployment is persistent in regional locations (Burrows and
Martin 2016) and this phenomenon will be graphically illustrated for selected locations in Queensland
(later in Figure 2).
Labour underutilisation is a concept that goes beyond aggregate unemployment statistics. To
understand this broader concept of underutilisation one must also consider involuntary part-time
employment, or underemployment, and discouraged workers, demonstrated by a decline in labour force
participation (Baum and Mitchell 2012). Underemployment also continues to remain stubbornly high
and is likewise driven by the youth demographic, for which the percentage of underemployed 15 to 24year-olds has increased from 13.5 per cent in 2012 to 17.4 per cent in 2016 (Oliver and Yu 2017).
Jobs being created are largely part-time for males and tend to be in industries with low wage growth for
females (Oliver and Yu 2017). Part-time employment for males increased by 25 per cent from 1970 to
1991 as a result of the loss of full time employment in recessions in the 1980s and 1990s without a
return of the full-time jobs lost in subsequent economic recoveries (Gregory 2012). The proportion of
the female workforce that is part-time has increased roughly one third in 1978 to one half in 2016
(Oliver and Yu 2017). Despite increased participation of women in the workforce over several decades,
the proportion of full time jobs for women has been disappointing (Gregory 2012). Women’s
participation in the workforce continues to increase, however Australia is still below the OECD average
for female participation (Oliver and Yu 2017).
Much of the change to regional labour markets has occurred in a deregulatory environment (Baum
2006). The neo-liberal approach to unemployment is to focus on the individual and the development
of the individual’s skills (Baum and Mitchell 2012). Research within geographic regions demonstrates
that labour market outcomes are beyond the control of the individual and pertain to prevailing structural
economic conditions (Burrows and Martin 2016). The focus on the individual for the solving of
unemployment in the regions therefore has only resulted a reshuffle of the queue for existing jobs (Baum
and Mitchell 2012).

1
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

The Nature of Queensland
The QCU has a local presence in all major regional centres throughout Queensland which reflects the
decentralised nature of Queensland. In Queensland 48.3 per cent of the population resides in the
greater-Brisbane area which is the second smallest percentage of any jurisdiction next to Tasmania.
Obviously, geographical and population differences between Queensland and Tasmania make those
two jurisdictions incomparable with respect to the provision of essential services and infrastructure.
South Australia and Western Australia have 77.3 and 78.6 per cent of their population living in the
metropolitan area of their capitals (ABS 2017). Decentralisation brings with it an array of challenges
particularly for the delivery of public services such as health, education and transport (Queensland
Government 2017).
Accordingly, that decentralisation provides for a range of policy concerns as it is often the regional
areas that will feel the brunt of economic downturn and deliberate attempts from governments to reduce
services within those regions. A typology undertaken by Baum (2006) provides an instructive definition
of some of Queensland regions. Tourism and mining are considered as providing positive economic
outcomes for various regions. Sea change regions and those regions reliant upon agriculture and “old
economy employment” are generally not associated with good employment outcomes. This typology
also explains the two-speed economy that has been experienced in regional Queensland and elsewhere
in Australia (Gregory 2012). The experience of Townsville illustrates the impact of economic downturn
in regional Queensland.
The absence of alternative employment prospects will mean that job losses in regional areas will have
a worse impact than those in metropolitan areas (Burrows and Martin 2016). The recent experience in
Queensland, whether by cuts to government funding or by other economic downturn, has been that
employment has been harder to come by in the regions than it is in the metropolitan area. The
experience in Townsville, as a prime example, has demonstrated the precarious nature of regional
employment. In addition to the reduction in front line services brought about by the Newman
Government, reductions in meat processing due to live export and the closure of the Queensland Nickel
plant have added to growing unemployment in Townsville (Oliver 2016). Figure 1 graphically
demonstrates employment (negative) growth in Townsville over recent years. Townsville is only now
starting to recover from the compounding impacts of cuts to services by the Newman Government and
structural changes to industry.

2
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

Source Queensland Government Statistician’s Office (2017)

In addition to economic restructuring, regional Queensland has to deal with the realities of climate
change. A reality of climate change is that natural disasters are increasing. Whilst there is separate
commonwealth funding for recovery from natural disasters, Queensland faces significant financial
losses from these more frequent events. In 2017 severe Tropical Cyclone Debbie caused substantial
damage to North Queensland where it crossed the coast and caused substantial flooding over other parts
of the State (BOM 2017). Debbie was the most damaging cyclone since Cyclone Yasi in 2011 and was
estimated to cost the Queensland economy $2 billion and wipe $1.5 billion from the Queensland Budget
(Tapim 2017). Queensland is not the only jurisdiction that faces natural disasters but the other features,
such as a decentralised population coupled with a long coast line in tropical waters, means that
Queensland will have more than its fair share of expensive disasters. In turn climate change has the
potential for adverse impacts to the hospitality industry including not only cyclones but the gradual
migration of dangerous wildlife and airborne diseases (QITC 2018).
In the previous discussion concerning the nature of disadvantage, youth unemployment was identified
as the major cause of persistent levels of unemployment in Australia (Oliver and Yu 2017). This is
particularly the case in regional Queensland with youth unemployment being significantly higher in
regional areas of Queensland than the state or national figures. The following figure graphically
illustrates the difficulties faced by regional areas in relation to unemployment. For ease of presentation
only a small number of regions have included in the following graphic. They do tend to demonstrate
the typology adopted by Baum to describe areas of relative advantage and disadvantage.

3
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

Figure 2
Unemployment & Youth Unemployment
by Region February 2018
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0

Unemplt

Youth Unemplt

Source ABS Labour Force Survey

Mining and FIFO
Closely linked to the relative advantage of geographic areas in Queensland will often be the existence
of mining activity. Mining is therefore an important aspect of the Queensland economy (Rolfe et al
2010). Whilst it does not directly employ large numbers of employees, the flow-on effect of mining
activity is considered to have a positive economic impact (Baum 2006; Reeson et al 2012). Mining
provides for high wages particularly for male employees and those high wages include blue collar
employees (Reeson et al 2012). Employment in mining has declined following the decline in
commodity prices experienced in the global financial crisis and that trend in declining employment has
continued (Oliver and Yu 2017).
The mining boom that was largely driven by the export of raw materials to China did however create a
two-speed economy (Gregory 2012). One disadvantage of a strong mining sector is the potential to
crowd out other economic activity (Reason et al 2012; Rolfe et al 2010). The two-speed economy
meant that labour market outcomes in Australia varied markedly from region to region.
Curiously, a study of the economic impacts of mining found that the multiplier effect of mining was
more positive in the capital city Brisbane than it was in the regions where the mining actually took place
(Reeson et al 2012). That inordinate positive impact for the capital city would be exacerbated by large
adoption of the practice of Fly in Fly out workforces.
As previously stated, the union movement understands the value of the resource sector to the Australian
and in particular the Queensland economy. The union movement did not advocate the eradication of
FIFO and other long-distance commuting work practices as they clearly have their place in a modern
setting. Aside from practicalities the FIFO lifestyle does suit some employees (Parliament of Australia
2013). Some projects that could only be serviced by such arrangements and the complete removal of
FIFO would be absurd (Parliament of Australia 2013). Equally absurd was the imposition of a policy
of 100% FIFO when there is a ready, willing and able workforce at the disposal of the companies
constructing or operating the mine.
4
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

The economic impact is not only for those workers involved in the construction of mines and extraction
of resources but for the broader community. Those employees who provide services, such education,
health and public safety to the broader community are also affected by decisions made in relation to
how these major projects are staffed. Regional and remote communities were found to be extremely
vulnerable to the introduction of 100% FIFO workforces (Parliament of Australia 2013).
If the resource sector is permitted to continue with 100% FIFO workforces, it could be envisaged that
this form of employment would become almost universal and this in turn would lead to the destruction
of communities that have grown up around and supported mining activities.
In the previous House of Representatives Standing Committee on Regional Australia Inquiry
(Parliament of Australia 2013) some submissions were optimistic about regional centres becoming
FIFO hubs. It should be noted that a FIFO is in fact a poor substitute for a regional community in terms
of the dollars spent by FIFO workers in transit compared to actual residents in a community (SGS 2014).
Another emerging trend that is of concern is the requirement of employees to be required to get
themselves to jobs in remote locations. The most parsimonious possible outcome is to further impose
the cost of travel on a FIFO workforce.
The Queensland Parliament has dealt with the issue of FIFO workforce by the Strong and Sustainable
Resource Communities Act 2016. The Explanatory note for the introduction of that Bill listed the
following policy objectives (Queensland Parliament 2016):
•
•
•
•
•

prescribe the social impact assessment (SIA) process for large resource projects;
prevent the use of 100 per cent FIFO workforces for the operation of future large resource
projects located near regional communities;
prevent resource companies discriminating against local residents in the future recruitment of
operational workers;
support existing and new workers who choose to live and work in regional communities; and
resolve the inconsistency that approval conditions may be imposed by the Coordinator-General
for projects subject to an environmental impact statement (EIS) under the State Development
and Public Works Organisation Act 1971 (SDPWO Act), but not for projects subject to an EIS
under the Environmental Protection Act 1994 (EP Act).

The Queensland Government needs to be commended for doing what it could to ban 100% FIFO
arrangements. As with a range of policies coordination at a national level would provide greater support
for regional communities that rely on mining for their on-going existence.

QCU Policy
The QCU has campaigned in the last two state elections on a policy platform that, amongst other things,
concentrated on regional development. These campaigns have undoubtedly contributed to the outcome
of the 2015 and 2017 Queensland elections. Queensland unions have long held an opposition to the ongoing policy of privatisation that was so indelibly linked to a neo-liberal economic agenda. Privatisation
is the term given to the transfer of assets or service delivery from the public sector (Government) to the
private sector (private for-profit business). Privatisation can take many forms including sale of assets
to the private sector; contracting out or out-sourcing services to private sector; offshoring services; and
simply no longer providing or reducing the service (Mead and Withers 2002; Waler and Con Walker
2006). Privatisation, in particular asset sales, was the primary determinant of the 2012 and 2015
Queensland elections.

5
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

A private provider is only going to be interested in activities that can generate a profit and experience
to date has been that the market will not provide for that set of circumstances in regional areas. The
provision of proper services to Queensland regardless of the geographic location will not provide for
better health education and transport outcomes but will also contribute to the creation of employment
in regional Queensland. Restoring TAFE as a quality public provider of vocational education is
fundamental to delivering labour market outcomes as well as ongoing education and employability to
regional youth in Queensland. Substantial infrastructure spend and associated policies of preference to
local business and employees has also been a feature of QCU policy.
Needless to say, that these policies have put the union movement at odds with the Liberal National Party
in Queensland. It is also reasonable to say that a large portion of QCU policy has been adopted by the
Palaszczuk Government since its election in 2015. The first order of business of the Palaszczuk
Government was to put a halt to the process of privatisation that was underway because of the Newman
Government’s policies. In particular, regional Queensland dodged a bullet when the privatisation of
the TAFE system in Queensland was averted. Other positive steps have been taken by the Palaszczuk
Government include previously mentioned legislation to prevent 100% FIFO workforces and the Buy
Queensland procurement policy.
QCU policy does not coincide with the policies of the current federal government. The Turnbull
Government remains committed to a neo-liberal economic agenda that has not provided the promised
trickle down. Unemployment remains persistently high and that is largely driven by youth
unemployment. It is obvious that regional areas are the worst impacted by an on-going neo-liberal
agenda. For there to be any turn around in the fortunes of regional Queensland those polices need to be
dispensed with and return to a focus on service delivery and infrastructure to the regions at all levels of
government.

Bibliography
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2017) Catalogue 2071.0 Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting
Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 - Snapshot of Australia
Baum, S (2006) “A Typology of Socio-Economic Advantage and Disadvantage in Australia’s Large
Non-Metropolitan Cities, Towns and Regions” Australian Geographer 37(2)
Baum, S and W Mitchell (2012) “Functional Economic Regions and Labour Underutilisation”
International Journal of Employment Studies Vol.20(1)
Boldery, R (2017) “Thousands lose jobs across Townville as unemployment rises” Townsville Bulletin
24 March 2017
Bureau of Meteorology (2017) “Severe Tropical Cyclone Debbie”
Burrows, S and M O’Brien (2016) “Youth as a reserve army of labour: Australia’s regional
unemployment conundrum” Labour and Industry 26 (2)
Gregory, R (2012) “Dark Corners in a Bright Economy: The Lack of Jobs for Unskilled Men”
Australian Bulletin of Labour 38 (1)
Healy, J (2016) “The Australian Labour Market in 2015” Journal of Industrial Relations 57 (3)
Mead, M and G Withers (eds) (2002) Privatisation: A Review of the Australian Experience CEDA
Oliver, L (2016) “Call for live exports cap” Townsville Bulletin 24 February 2016

6
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 24

Oliver, D and S Yu (2017) “The Australian Labour Market in 2016” Journal of Industrial Relations 59
(3)
Queensland Council of Unions (2013) Submission for the Inquiry into the conditions of employment of
state public sector employees and the adequacy of protection of their rights at work as compared with
other employees
Queensland Council of Union (2014) Submission Certain to Aspects of Queensland Government
Administration related to Commonwealth Government Affairs
Queensland Government (2017) Queensland Government Submission Productivity Commission Inquiry
into Horizontal Fiscal Equalisation June 2017
Queensland Government Statistician’s Office (2017) Regional labour force – Townsville SA4, May 17
Queensland Parliament (2016) Strong and Sustainable Resource Communities Bill 2016 Explanatory
Notes
Queensland Tourism Industry Council (2018) Tourism Sector Adaptation Plan
Reeson, A, T Measham and K Hosking (2012) “Mining activity, income inequality and gender in
regional Australia” The Austrlian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 56
Richardson, D and R Denniss (2010) The regional impact of public service job cuts The Australia
Institute Policy Brief No. 18 August 2010
Rolfe, J, R Lawrence, D Gregg, F Morrish and G Ivanova (2010) Minerals and Energy Resource Sector
in Queensland Economic Impact Study The Eidos Institute Brisbane
Sansom, M (2015) “Asset sales dominate NSW and QLD elections” Government News 17 February
2015
Scott, A (2015) The Newman Years Rise, Decline and Fall TJ Ryan Foundation
Tapim, F (2017) “Cyclone Debbie likely to cost Queensland budget $1.5 billion” ABC News 24 Apr
2017
Walker, B and B Con Walker (2006) Privatisation: Sell Off or Sell Out ABC Books Sydney

7
QCU submission Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality.

