Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

INQUIRY INTO THE INDICATORS OF, AND IMPACT OF,
REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
Parliament of Australia
Senate Economics References Committee

EVOCITIES SUBMISSION
Submitted by: Cr Kevin Mack – Chair of Evocities Steering Committee and
NSW Inland Forum, April 2018

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 1 of 10

Contents
1.

Terms of Reference

2

2.

Introduction

2

3.

Evocities Background

2

4.

Regional Hubs

3

The Evocities act as service hubs for surrounding communities, so their management
structure is unique, and the growth of these regional hubs results in considerable flowon benefits for the surrounding regions.

3

Collaboration and Funding of the Evocities Program (a,b)

4

Evocities’ pooled funds and collective governance makes it possible to reach a large
audience, improve the capital city residents’ perception of regional city living, and
attract highly productive new residents to regional NSW.

4

Regional Development and Australia’s Growing Population (a,c)

5

The Evocities recognise that investment in growing regional cities benefits all levels of
government and results in improvements in both regional and capital city living.

5

Collaboration on Regional Development Strategies (b,c)

6

Evocities support the development of regional development policies that recognise
existing strategies and priorities, champion strategic partnerships and collaboration,
and acknowledge the importance of the regions to the greater economy.

6

Services and Facilities – Growing and Retaining Regional Population (e,f)

6

Evocities support the development of services and facilities that assist in actively
driving sustainable population growth and retention in regional Australia.

6

The Workforce, Education and Employment (g,h)

7

The Evocities councils each place high premiums on attracting skilled professionals
alongside developing the regions’ existing employee skills base to match the
requirements of business and industry and drive new opportunities and cultural
change.

7

Innovation, Industry, and Infrastructure (d,j,k)

8

Evocities recognise that innovation, following global trends, growing an
entrepreneurial base, and improving connectivity through both technology and
transport, is vital for the development of our regions.

8

Incentivising Business Relocation – Nashville Case Study (i,l)

9

Evocities support the development of strategic business relocation incentives that
encourage companies and corporations to establish themselves in regional locations,
over decentralising finite agencies or focussing on the addition of satellite offices.

9

Conclusion

10

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 2 of 10

1.

Terms of Reference

On 14 February 2018 the following matter was referred to the Economics References Committee for
inquiry and report by the last day of sitting in June 2019.
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.

2.

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
regional development policies;
infrastructure;
education;
building human capital;
enhancing local workforce skills;
employment arrangements;
decentralisation policies;
innovation;
manufacturing; and
any other related matters.

Introduction

The Evocities of Albury, Armidale, Bathurst, Dubbo, Orange, Tamworth and Wagga Wagga appreciate
the opportunity to respond to this inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia. Together with an outline of the Evocities program, this report will detail how Evocities takes
a collaborative approach to driving the economic growth of regional New South Wales (NSW) through
increasing the regions’ population base, which fuels the economy, driving innovation, investment,
cultural activity and entrepreneurial spirit. Actively contributing to the growth and development of
NSW’s largest regional inland cities the campaign has proven to be beneficial for not just individuals
and business within the Evocities, but also for the surrounding regions, the state and national
economy.

3.

Evocities Background

Evocities is a joint initiative of local councils of Albury, Armidale, Bathurst, Dubbo, Orange, Tamworth
and Wagga Wagga. The core purpose of Evocities is to educate metropolitan residents about what
regional NSW cities have to offer and to combat long held misconceptions about regional city living.
We aim to encourage people to live, work and invest in an Evocity by spreading the word that in the
Evocities individuals and families enjoy an improved lifestyle with more free time, family time and time
outdoors; shorter commutes; a reduced cost of living; a community focus; thriving food, arts and
cultural scenes; and a rich urban experience.
Evocities acts as a portal for people interested in making the move to get more information about the
city/cities they may be interested in and view employment opportunities. It also provides a platform to
connect with people who can guide them through the relocation process. By combining under the

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 3 of 10

Evocities brand, each of the seven cities enjoys greater marketing, educational and promotional
opportunities than they otherwise would, trying to do so on their own.
Evocities’ marketing campaign and program of activities offers a proven formula to assist the NSW
Government in managing Sydney’s population growth and the increased pressure this places on public
infrastructure, while also driving sustainable growth and development in regional NSW.
Evocities is one of the most successful regional marketing campaigns undertaken in Australia, with over
3,415 families having relocated to date. It has attracted significant market penetration and delivered
fantastic key outcomes for all the cities involved. Indirectly, the Evocities project has raised the
credibility of NSW inland regional cities with a range of different stakeholders and provides the cities
with a collaborative model to achieve greater return on marketing investment.
Since the campaign launch, Evocities staff have responded to over 7,500 relocation enquiries, most of
which have been generated though the Evocities website, the central online portal for the campaign.
The Evocities website, Evocities.com.au, is supported by an Evocities branded employment website,
Evojobs.com.au. Since its launch, Evocities has seen more than 2.9 million visits to the Evocities suite of
website.

4.

Regional Hubs

The Evocities act as service hubs for surrounding communities, so their management structure is
unique, and the growth of these regional hubs results in considerable flow-on benefits for the
surrounding regions.
Because each of the Evocities are regional hubs, there are strong flow-on benefits to surrounding
communities. ABS data indicates once individuals experience life in a regional city they are more likely
to remain within the region rather than relocate to metropolitan areas. According to the 2016 Census
data, of those residents who are moving out of the seven Evocities, more than 58% are choosing to
remain within regional NSW (42.2%), regional Queensland (8.5%) or regional Victoria (7.5%).
The seven councils which currently participate in Evocities have a combined population of over
340,000, with some cities servicing catchment areas up to three times their size. Each of the Evocities
are large regional councils, which encompass a total land area of almost 35,000 sq. km and are made
up of not only the primary regional city but also many smaller surrounding towns and villages. In
contrast, Greater Sydney covers 12,367.7 sq. km and is made up of 35 local councils. This comparison
of the amount of land and settlements regional councils are responsible for gives an indication that the
vastness of responsibilities and management operations are completely unique to that of metropolitan
councils. For these reasons, regional cities require more support from federal and state government
and any support they receive benefits not just the regional cities themselves, but also the surrounding
regions.

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 4 of 10

5.

Collaboration and Funding of the Evocities Program (a,b)

Evocities’ pooled funds and collective governance makes it possible to reach a large audience, improve
the capital city residents’ perception of regional city living, and attract highly productive new residents
to regional NSW.
The Evocities concept is unique in that it is not individual cities selling themselves, but for the first time,
seven regional city councils working together. Each of the seven cities has and continues to dedicate
money and resources to funding the campaign. Evocities has also received funding from corporate
sponsors, the NSW Government and the Federal Government.
The combining of funds and resources means that marketing, PR and digital elements of the campaign,
which focus on the benefits of living in an Evocity, have far greater impact than a campaign run by any
individual city on its own. The cities have also dedicated considerable resources to welcome and
support new residents to ensure they enjoy a smooth transition and a positive experience of their new
city.
In 2017 the Evocities program benefitted from the NSW Government’s Regional Growth – Marketing
and Promotion Fund (RGMPF) grant of $300,000. RGMPF is a $1 million program designed to attract
new business, investment and skilled workers to regional NSW, supporting development of regional
economies. The Evocities project being awarded almost a third of the program’s budget is evidence of
the NSW Government’s endorsement of this collective initiative, however, the cost of marketing into
metropolitan areas is very high and therefor ongoing funds are vital to achieve the desired level of
impact, educating metropolitan residents about the advantages of regional city living.
The RGMPF funding was pooled with the Evocities councils’ contributions and was used on strategic
marketing initiatives to reach a mass audience. The campaign, worth over $511,000 expended over the
first and second quarter of 2017/18, saw a dramatic 52% increase in website visitation, compared to
the same period the previous year. During this same period Evocities staff made 997 responses to
enquiries from around Australia, up 345% from the same period the previous year. These results are
testament to the reach that can be achieved with the support of federal and state government.
As well as joining together to promote regional living and draw people to live, work and invest in
regional NSW, the Evocities project is the perfect example of how collaboration between levels of
government can be successful and is necessary when working towards shared goals. The Evocities
campaign reflects critical identification of regional priorities by local communities, councils and regions,
and proactive investment in those priorities. The continuing collaboration between the seven cities has
not only worked to enhance the impact of the marketing campaign, but also united the cities in
presenting a single voice on matters of mutual interest and driving sustainable growth to each of their
respective cities.

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 5 of 10

6.

Regional Development and Australia’s Growing Population (a,c)

The Evocities recognise that investment in growing regional cities benefits all levels of government and
results in improvements in both regional and capital city living.
While the growing prominence of Australia’s capital cities internationally does create potential for their
relevant states, it also raises many concerns for the cities which are already facing infrastructure
pressures caused by a rapidly increasing population. The Evocities program over the past seven years
has been offering a sound approach to assisting the NSW Government in managing Sydney’s
population growth, by actively driving a population shift from capital cities to regional NSW, aiding the
creation of a skilled labour force, increasing workforce diversity and providing greater choice for
investors and employees.
The Regional Australia Institute released a report in October 2016 stating for every 100,000 Australians
who choose to live in growing cities, rather than our big five cities of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane,
Perth and Adelaide, an additional $50 billion will be released into the economy over 30 years in
reduced congestion costs and increased consumption1. Furthermore, it has been estimated that in
Sydney congestion will cost $8 billion per annum by 2021 unless appropriate action is taken2. In order
to mitigate the effects of population growth in capital cities, the Government must consider initiatives
like Evocities and invest in regional cities by implementing policies which incentivise families and
business to move to or invest in these regional growth areas.
The OECD has recently found that countries with a greater network of cities or polycentric urban
systems have higher per capita GDP and are more likely to have a buoyant economy which can resist
major negative economic or environmental impacts3. To create these cities and to ensure the regions
benefit from the expansion of international trade, infrastructure, employment, tourism, innovation and
research, the Government’s aim must be to actively grow the regions and support infrastructure
requirements. Including, hard infrastructure and quality roads to help to overcome the concern of
distance, as well as mobile towers and the NBN network to provide technological connectivity for
business and individuals. If the regions can attract quality businesses, then they can attract the human
capital necessary to lead successful organisations, which in the long term benefits not only the cities,
but also the new and existing residents, creating a better quality of life and assisting in population
retention.

1

J.
Archer,
Regional
Australia
Institute,
Great
Small
Cities,
http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/2016/10/economic-growth-requires-connected-regional-cities-notfactory-floors, Accessed 14 August 2017
2
NSW Government, Premier’s - Building Infrastructure, https://www.nsw.gov.au/improving-nsw/premierspriorities/building-infrastructure/#building-infrastructure, Accessed 14 August 2017
3
Regional Australia Institute, Deal or No Deal – Bringing Small Cities into the National Cities Agenda, April 2016
p.6
ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 6 of 10

7.

Collaboration on Regional Development Strategies (b,c)

Evocities support the development of regional development policies that recognise existing strategies
and priorities, champion strategic partnerships and collaboration, and acknowledge the importance of
the regions to the greater economy.
The current Regional Economic Development Strategies (REDS) being developed across NSW considers
our councils’ strategies and clearly highlight the strengths of each region and could be used to identify
the strategic priority areas for future investment by the federal and state government. Still,
collaboration and recognition of existing strategies and priorities of our regions, when creating
relevant policies at all levels of government, would be beneficial to all.
Strategic partnerships and collaboration underpin the success of regional strategies. The Evocities
member councils understand the value of establishing a ‘whole of economy’ plan that is not just about
what local government can do but what can be achieved through working in unison with a wide range
of stakeholders and all levels of government to drive economic prosperity for our regions.
Evocities support the establishment of a unified direction to help regions realise projects and progress
priorities that support economic prosperity and growth. Evocities councils attempt to work in synergy
with other key documents for regional development, rather than replicate or work against their
objectives, and are keen to share their strategies and implementation plans with federal and state
government agencies to ensure future policies build on the work already completed by our councils.

8.

Services and Facilities – Growing and Retaining Regional Population (e,f)

Evocities support the development of services and facilities that assist in actively driving sustainable
population growth and retention in regional Australia.
Evocities recognises that people are more likely to make the move if they understand that the services
offered within regional capitals are similar to those offered in a capital city, therefore services and
facilities are vital to a growing economy. As indicated by research conducted by Evocities4, relocators
look for a critical mass of services and community vibrancy linked to population and progress. In turn,
investing firms will look for the presence of quality, multi-skilled people and education systems as part
of their investment decisions.
In order to do this each city must be able to successfully provide the necessary employment,
education, health and lifestyle facilities to cater to the demands of the population and provide
reassurance to residents that the services offered are equal to, if not superior to, those found in the
capital cities.
The Evocities understand that resident attraction is important, but equally important is the retention of
the new and existing residents. The Evocities are aware that vibrant, cohesive and engaged
communities are essential to retain population and know that by creating a positive employment

4

Charles Sturt University, Awareness & Perceptions of Regional NSW and Attitudes Towards Relocation, March
2012
ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 7 of 10

environment and gaining an influx of new workers a cultural change will continue to emerge. Cultural
change and diversity encourages the development of new value-adding sectors to the regions, which
create facilities to improve the lifestyle of local residents, ensuring population retention, as well as
increasing attractions to build the tourism market.
As a whole the Evocities have a combined population of over 340,000, with some cities servicing
catchment areas up to three times their size, therefore service industries including superior health and
education facilities are not only required but could also be supported and provide opportunity for
major jobs growth.
Regional cities, including the Evocities show a higher youth presence than the capital cities along with
an ageing population5 and therefore a focus on building the Health Care and Education and Training
sectors would not only create opportunities for regional growth, but also help to service current
residents, enhance the workforce capabilities, assist in population retention and relieve ongoing
pressure on the capital cities’ hospitals and universities.

9.

The Workforce, Education and Employment (g,h)

The Evocities councils each place high premiums on attracting skilled professionals alongside
developing the regions’ existing employee skills base to match the requirements of business and
industry and drive new opportunities and cultural change.
The Evocities program is contributing to the sustained lifting of productivity and enhancement of the
skills mix and availability in inland NSW by attracting new residents, skilled workers and professionals
into regional NSW, delivering enduring economic and community benefits, including sustained
increases to economic output and increases in social capital, skills and cultural bases.
Over the past seven years the Evojobs website has advertised over 32,200 local jobs, attracting over
2.3 million visits to the site. The Evojobs website is also utilised by local employers from the seven
cities to attract highly qualified candidates to their organisations and is equally useful in supporting
population retention, with locals seeking employment or career changes accessing the site.
Investing in the region’s educational assets will ensure students and the regions workforce contribute
to the broad economic and knowledge base of the region; enhancing the Evocities’ global
competitiveness.
The need to ensure a broad range of school activities are supported through information technologies
(IT) or technological infrastructure is essential in creating a learning environment that will help
students enter and adapt to the workforce. A learning environment that is founded on problem solving
and creative thinking will result in an innovative workforce and increase the knowledge base and
competitiveness of the region.

5

Regional Australia Institute, Deal or No Deal – Bringing Small Cities into the National Cities Agenda, April 2016
pp.12-13
ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 8 of 10

10. Innovation, Industry, and Infrastructure (d,j,k)
Evocities recognise that innovation, following global trends, growing an entrepreneurial base, and
improving connectivity through both technology and transport, is vital for the development of our
regions.
The Evocities recognise that to facilitate long term growth our regions must become ‘globally fluent’ by
remaining in front of global trends and encouraging innovation, advanced manufacturing, direct
investment and ensuring dynamic freight flow. Innovation in regional industries will bring high level
jobs and higher salaries. Attracting scientists, researchers, or software engineer, for example, triggers a
multiplier effect, increasing employment and expanding salaries in the local economy.
There is a need for the ongoing development and renewal of infrastructure to support new investment,
reduce production costs, improve quality of life and enable the long term sustainability of the region.
The uptake of advanced manufacturing will support existing manufacturers to enter new markets,
devise new products and improve productivity. It will also help establish innovative local industries by
creating new business models, products and processes.
Connection to high speed broadband throughout the region will increase business productivity,
innovation and product development. This will lead to cost savings throughout the supply chain
network, greater efficiencies and profitability for the region’s industry base. Ensuring equitable
internet access for regional residents will assist in connecting communities, knowledge sharing and
allow access to global information and cultural resources.
Creating a strong and supported tech start-up ecosystem is essential for our regional cities. Fostering
an ecosystem where people see opportunities to start a business, where people believe in the skills
and knowledge they hold, and where entrepreneurial successes are highly visible in the media will
assist in growing an entrepreneurial base in the region.
Robust transportation and logistics network, via road, rail and air, is a cornerstone of our regions’
vitality. Outside of its commercial benefits, the network gives city residents and visitors the means to
reach and enjoy all aspects of life the region has to offer. Our airports are deeply linked into the
regions’ economic activities, with these linkages increasingly driven by growth in leisure tourism and
business travel and the regional expansion of strategic resources, agricultural activities and global
industries.

ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 9 of 10

11. Incentivising Business Relocation – Nashville Case Study (i,l)
Evocities support the development of strategic business relocation incentives that encourage
companies and corporations to establish themselves in regional locations, over decentralising finite
agencies or focussing on the addition of satellite offices.
Reducing obstacles to industries and businesses looking to set up in regions where they can make
better use of regional assets including land, natural resources and transport corridors is a priority for
the Evocities councils.
Evocities would like to draw your attention to a program run by the city of Nashville in Tennessee
called Partnership 2020. The Partnership 2020 program (formerly Partnership 2000 and Partnership
2010) is a public-private partnership whose purpose is to recruit new businesses to the greater
Nashville area. The partnership has been the driving force for the regional economy since 1990, with
over 930 companies relocating operations to Middle Tennessee including the likes of Nissan, Amazon
and Google. The relocation of major organisations and business expansion has resulted in an
impressive 485,000 new jobs in the Nashville region6.
The partnership is driven by the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce and the Metro Government of
Nashville and Davidson County with the support of business. The partnership seeks investment from
companies and corporations through an annual contribution. The chamber’s primary focus is economic
development and their effort in this field has earned it the title of being the top economic
development group in the USA. Another key player in the partnership is the Government of Tennessee.
Nashville’s Prosperity Strategy has three strategic drivers:
1)

2)

3)

Economic Prosperity – creating a diverse range of quality employment opportunities, with
a focus on job creation in five target industry sectors while elevating incomes in the region.
Differentiating Nashville as a leader in the nation with a strategic focus on attracting
international investment, business recruitment, retention and expansion, and supporting
small business and entrepreneurial growth.
Talent Development – preparing the region’s K-16 (schools) pipeline as the next generation
of talent with the skills needed to advance in a variety of existing and emerging fields.
Continuing a focus on the attraction and retention of highly skilled and educated workers
to generate the competitive talent necessary for businesses starting, growing or moving to
the Nashville region.
Place and Liveability – proactively addressing the need to plan for a growing population,
including regional transit, affordability and global connectivity while maintaining the
Nashville region’s cost of living advantages and preserving its unique assets. Focusing on
the region’s overall quality of place.

6

Partnership 2020. Nashville Chamber. https://www.nashvillechamber.com/membership/partnership-2020
(accessed 31 January, 2018).
ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 27

Evocities Submission - Page 10 of 10

The Nashville region's economic development partners offer exceptional incentives to relocating and
expanding. The Incentives come from three sources – State of Tennessee, Tennessee Valley Authority,
and the local community. The incentive evaluation process is based on a variety of economic factors
including capital investment, new jobs created, wages, etc. A qualified business that creates at least 25
net new jobs and invests at least $500,000 in a 36 month period may qualify for an incentives
package. Based on the project, the incentives could include job tax credits, infrastructure/training
assistance, energy credits, low cost loans and grants or others7.
Partnership 2020 is the perfect example of how a targeted strategy paired with collaboration between
the public and private sector can have a major long-term, sustainable economic impact on a growing
region. Evocities recommendation in the first instance would be to review any government department
or programs which are not achieving a significant return on investment or are underperforming, and
utilise those funds to provide direct financial incentives to private companies looking at expanding or
establishing in regional areas. Level of funding should be based on the achievement of capital
investment and job performance outcomes.
Evocities believes it is important to allow ourselves to be educated by places like Nashville who set out
almost 30 years ago to grow their region and recruit new businesses and have done so very
successfully. In the 15 years between 2000 and 2015 Nashville’s Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)
grew by over 500,0008. The lesson here is sound economic strategies, paired with business relocation
incentives and partnerships is a formula which has the potential to have an impressive economic
impact on regional NSW.

12. Conclusion
Evocities’ focus is population building because it is understood that progress is linked to population
numbers and the human capital which accompanies it. Whilst the campaign’s focus is on the seven
regional capitals, the outputs flow through to the surrounding regions. As such, it is important that the
Government continues to collaborate with regional capitals, as well as state and local government to
create initiatives which complement campaigns like Evocities, which actively contribute to growth and
development of regional areas and reduce pressures on capital city infrastructure.
By creating incentives for capital city based companies to relocate to regional areas, expanding public
services, enhancing health, education, transport and communication facilities, the regional capitals
become more marketable and campaigns like Evocities will have even greater success.
In the long term, if focus is placed on the right initiatives, regional areas will not only continue to forge
more resilient economies but become major players in a strong state and national economy.

7

Taxes and Incentives. Nashville Chamber. https://www.nashvillechamber.com/economic-development/relocateor-expand/taxes-incentives (accessed 31 January, 2018).
8
Population. Nashville Chamber. https://www.nashvillechamber.com/economic-development/relocate-orexpand/taxes-incentives (accessed 2 February, 2018).
ALBURY | ARMIDALE | BATHURST | DUBBO | ORANGE | TAMWORTH | WAGGA WAGA

