Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

Submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of,
and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
From the NSW Rural Doctors Network (RDN)
30 April 2018

General comments
It remains the case in rural NSW that the health care industry is often the biggest employer. Thus, it
follows that the rural health sector has a significant responsibility for the building of human capital townby-town and district-by-district. The very nature of the health industry means that maintaining the
education and professional standards of its employees and contractors is paramount and indeed is a
requirement of colleges and national regulation authorities. This is especially the case in rural NSW
where, due to workforce shortages, skills deficits and the impact of critical mass and consumer demand,
there is a need for staff to multi task and assume broader responsibilities in general. For example, in a
remote north-west town of some 3,000 people RDN has trained a nurse to provide home-based sleep
apnoea services, something that would be provided by specialist teams in an urban setting.
In the rural Base hospitals, the same types of problems can have an impact. For example, where critical
mass has not reached a level to support subspecialty medical practitioner rosters within their own craft
group, subspecialists will be required to support general on-call rosters. This can be a challenge for, say,
renal physicians who might be interested in relocating to a rural centre but find the requirement to be on
call for general medicine daunting.
However, rural NSW is not one amorphous mass. The Australian Government’s accepted definition
of rurality recognises this. Many of the provincial cities are doing well and have a good range of industries
supported by significant population growth e.g. Bathurst. Outside these larger centres of population are
towns, villages and localities with populations of roughly 10,000 to a few hundred. Each has its own set
of problems that require specific solutions.
While the notion of consumer choice is a tenet of most governments, this is not a reality for many rural
consumers and this is exemplified in health and education. In the health sector, smaller rural communities
will most likely have a GP practice supported by other state and federally-funded primary health services
including State health funded primary health services, possibly a federally-funded Aboriginal Community
Controlled Health Service and federal funding for primary health services channelled through Primary
Health Networks and through RDN for its range of multidisciplinary health outreach services.
Where does private health insurance fit into this rural picture? The structures that maintain rural
health services, reliant as they are on public funding for communities that have lower incomes and poorer
educational achievements, impact on consumer choice in a variety of ways. Because there is little choice
for health care consumers in the smaller centres, there is in turn limited need to rely on private insurance.
Even in the larger population centres where there will be a private hospital, patients are more or less
guaranteed to have surgery performed by their surgeon of choice in the public hospital. Indeed, some
surgeons discourage their patients from using private insurance, if they hold it, when undergoing
procedures in the public hospital. With limited choice of surgeons and uncertainty about out-of-pocket
costs in the private hospital, patients may as well have their surgery performed in the public system.

NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 1 of 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

In many small rural towns that have lost much industry and services over the last few decades the health
and education sectors remain to support otherwise often economically ailing communities. It is the sad
fact that these communities are also ailing in terms of human health due to the impacts of all or some of
the following:


The dire extent of rural and remote Aboriginal disadvantage demonstrated by all current indicators
and that reinforce a growing rural/urban divide for this population



High unemployment. The health and social consequences of this are well researched and well
known



Limited access to healthy affordable food



Poor housing



Deteriorating and otherwise difficult to maintain infrastructure (e.g. roads, rail and air services etc)



Limited access to a range of services including health care



Limited transport options for local people needing to access services that are not available locally
e.g. higher level health care



Climate change. Climate modelling tells us that significant parts of NSW are likely to become drier
and hotter which will make many current industries more difficult including agriculture. This will
have further dire impacts on the economy of rural communities that do not have substantial
government infrastructure to support them.

The poor health of rural Australians is very well known but the implementation of effective strategies and
health care interventions is still a long way from being effective. The impact of obesity, smoking rates
particularly amongst Aboriginal people, and the epidemic of complex and chronic disease has led to a
variety of interventions with little evidence to date of their long-term effectiveness despite the best of
intentions. The burden of mental illness including suicide, contributed to by social and economic decline,
is a problem particularly for young males
There is a building body of evidence supporting comprehensive interventions for the first 1,000 days of
life but early identification and prevention programs can be discontinuous and overwhelmed by the
inexhaustible needs and demands of the larger acute hospitals.
In general, there is significant inequality both between rural populations and between rural and urban
populations. Further, and unlike urban centres, health services contribute in a significant way to sustaining
rural communities.

Comments responding to the Terms of Reference
a) Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels
The short-term nature of health contracts particularly at the federal level has created a sense of
uncertainty about service provision at the local level. For communities already underserviced this
is an added burden. To secure any long- term change, particularly in terms of human behaviour,
requires long- term interventions and these interventions cannot be guaranteed through many of
the programs currently funded. This problem has been recognised with the granting of 3-year
rural workforce contracts for the Rural Workforce Agencies for Health (RWAs) – of which
NSWRDN is the RWA for NSW, which a significant step towards stability and long-term planning
and interventions. This has provided the confidence for RDN to undertake an ambitious 10-year
workforce planning project in Western NSW.

NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 2 of 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

b) Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
In some part due to the multiplicity of health programs and funding sources, particularly at the
federal level in the last decade, there has been the potential for and reality of overlapping
responsibilities and duplication of services on the ground. This causes frustration and uncertainty
and leads to reporting burdens.
There is still confusion about the responsibilities of state and federal governments, particularly in
regard to Primary Health Care and this contributes to ongoing cost shifting between different
levels of government.
The ongoing roll out of the NDIS is likely to bring significantly more funding to rural areas and this
will require the development of effective networking and collaboration with existing health service
providers.
Local government should have significant human health responsibilities in terms of prioritising
funding for infrastructure to support healthy communities but in reality this is patchy. Some
Councils have expressed an interest in becoming more involved in supporting the health of their
communities but many will probably need help to do this.
c) Regional development policies
Many major regional centres appear to be growing steadily, some because of the deliberate
movement of people from Sydney. It is unknown what might be the contribution from regional
development policies apart from those that have been well publicised in the New England area,
for example.
However, some major regional centres appear to be growing at the expense of the surrounding
towns and villages that may be shrinking as a consequence. If this trend continues there will be
an impact in terms of the availability of government services such as health care in these smaller
centres due in part to the consideration of critical mass and the availability of health professionals.
As mentioned, the health sector is and will continue to be a major economic contributor to
supporting rural communities.
d) Infrastructure
In the health sector, infrastructure in terms of hospital building stock is often surprisingly good
with modern hospitals and operating theatres etc but the smaller facilities are frequently
underutilised. However, outreach by surgeons for day procedures etc would require significant
operational funding and upskilling of support staff, not to mention surgeons willing to travel. Thus
the barriers to effective utilisation are great.
However, the use of Telehealth is expanding and, while impacted by variable internet access,
offers excellent opportunities to bring expert health advice to rural and remote locations. RDN
has been using Telehealth to support rural health professionals in many areas including
endocrinology, mental health and palliative care. Despite every effort including federal financial
incentives, many health care professionals remain unengaged with and unaware of the capacity
of Telehealth. A review of the Telehealth item numbers would be appropriate.
e) Education
Education, both public and private, is well provided for in the major rural population centres such
as Orange, Dubbo, Tamworth, Wagga and Albury. These rural cities also have TAFE and the
tertiary sector eg Charles Sturt University and, in health, the Rural Clinical Schools of the major
metropolitan universities. Many of the larger referral hospitals also have specialty medical
registrar programs and teach across disciplines including medicine, surgery, obstetrics,
paediatrics and emergency medicine. These centres also support procedural GP training for GPs
NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 3 of 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

working in smaller and more remote settings. However, specialist medical training is still generally
only partly available in the rural setting with most training occurring in metropolitan teaching
hospitals. This does have an adverse impact on the availability of specialists for rural positions.
The picture is very different in the smaller rural centres where anecdotal evidence tells us that
racial tensions still exist in some of the more remote schools with those parents who can afford
the cost choosing to send their children to boarding school. This in turn can further impact the
long- term sustainability of these centres.
Both state and federal funding support ongoing education of health care staff. At state level much
of the basic education is a requirement of employment and at the federal level, funding supports
education to be provided to local health professionals by outreach health practitioners. This has
been a very welcome component of the Australian Government’s suite of health outreach
programs and it is hoped this will continue.
It has been very encouraging to see the Australian Government increase its support for rurally
based pre-vocational training for doctors. The recently introduced Rural Junior Doctor Training
Innovation Fund supports interns to undertake 1 of their training terms in general practice. This is
a great boost for vertical integration of training whereby medical students at Base hospitals can
now undertake GP training locally which, in turn, will support continuity into rurally based GP
training.
f)

Building human capital
In the health care sector, as mentioned previously, there is, out of necessity, ongoing education
to support building local human capital. Health professional shortages in the smaller centres, for
example, have highlighted the need to educate Aboriginal Health Workers and nurses to often
work outside their normal scope of practice. Furthermore, even in the rural cities access barriers
such as the cost of professional services has necessitated finding alternative workforce solutions
to meet needs. For example, in one provincial centre, RDN trained a nurse to provide
colposcopies for local and outlying Aboriginal women who were unable to access local
gynaecologists because they did not bulk bill and the women could not afford to pay the upfront
fees.
It must be recognised that health care workers cannot not be seen in isolation from their families.
Health practitioners who are attracted to a rural centre are likely to bring their families with their
own sets of skills and interests who, in turn, will support local schools and businesses. Family
support is therefore considered to be an important aspect of health practitioner recruitment and
retention.
Mentoring and support for international medical graduates (IMGs) to complete their pathway to
fellowship of the relevant medical college can be problematic. Doctors willing to supervise can be
hard to find and there a few incentives and indeed many risks involved for mentors and
supervisors.

g) Enhancing local workforce skills
Continuing professional development, skills acquisition and general ongoing education are
essential features of health care organisations.
This education is supported by professional colleges and is made available to remote settings via
tele and video link.
RDN supports ongoing education for GPs and IMGs who may be conditionally registered to work
in rural locations where there is a workforce shortage. RDN has found that offering conferences
in locations such as Sydney and Coffs Harbour affords hard working GPs and their families some
relief from their communities with the benefit of networking as well. In addition, RDN is introducing
rurally based CPD opportunities to help improve accessibility to education for rural and remote
NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 4 of 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

practitioners. This complements the education programs provided by other rural organisations
such as Primary Health Networks and LHDs.
h) Employment arrangements
General practitioners are largely self- employed private practitioners. However, in the smaller and
more remote locations this model is not always ideal. Smaller populations may not easily support
a private GP and the emerging GP workforce appears to have very different ideas about quality
of life at work and work/life balance. In response, different GP practice models have come into
being such as those provided by the Rural and Remote Medical Service (RaRMS) and other
private providers that employ GPs.
Rural GP proceduralists currently support the provision of low risk obstetrics, anaesthetics and
some surgery in some smaller facilities. These are important functions. For example, GP
anaesthetists support local visiting surgeons to perform low risk procedures for patients who
would otherwise need to travel to the bigger referral centres. These positions however are
becoming difficult to sustain and there will be value in considering funding and workforce models
to maintain them.
The Australian Government’s recognition of Districts of Workforce Shortage has supported the
recruitment of GPs who may be IMGs or who may otherwise not have achieved Vocational
Registration (VR). This is an important ongoing initiative that provides a medical workforce where
there would otherwise be none with incentives to obtain VR through support to achieve the
relevant college fellowship.
As the larger rural referral hospitals grow in complexity and range of services the opportunity to
provide outreach to the wider catchment is also growing. These larger facilities are increasingly
able to expand outreach from a range of medical specialists and allied health professionals,
facilitated in part because rural Base hospitals are more able to directly employ staff specialists
in addition to the more traditional arrangement with VMO contractors. It is a concern that fewer
GPs are opting to work as VMOs in smaller rural towns because of the onerous nature of the work
involved and this will have a significant impact on access to emergency services. Other workforce
solutions may need to be considered form place to place including more nurse practitioners. This
is an issue being considered in New Zealand at present.
In addition to the State health system, the Australian Government has provided welcome funding
for a range of health programs such as its suite of rural health outreach programs and contracting
arrangements through the federally-funded Primary Health Networks. While welcome, the
programs have supported a growing number of private contractors and FIFO health professionals
who work for an hourly rate. This may not always be the most cost-effective solution to health
workforce shortages and the opportunity to directly employ selected staff could be considered.
Despite the growth of the rural referral hospitals, there remains a dependency on overseas
recruitment particularly for some medical subspecialties. For example, Bathurst Hospital has
been unable to recruit Australian trained anaesthetists despite a major recruitment initiative and
has needed to recruit IMGs. The process of approvals particularly through the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Authority (AHPRA) and to a lesser extent the Department of Immigration
can be very clumsy and bureaucratic and the delays in recruitment are often extensive
necessitating a reliance on expensive and sometimes unsafe locums.
The continuation of Medicare item numbers for Telehealth consultations is considered essential
but ultimately should be commensurate with the actual cost of providing the service. Again, rural
Base hospitals have an important role in providing Telehealth service to their outlying rural and
remote communities.
i)

Decentralisation policies
We know there are too many GPs in urban areas and a fresh investigation of decentralisation
successes and failures for this group would be useful.

NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 5 of 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 28

For general practice and, more recently, allied health service providers, the issue is about
retention of these small businesses.
Access to a wide range of health services and subspecialists is dependent upon a critical mass
of population and decentralisation, whether government driven or personal choice, is a key to
improved access to health care.
j)

Innovation
Ongoing workforce supply problems in rural NSW have resulted in innovative solutions including
training staff to perform work outside their normal scope of practice and the expansion and
increased sophistication of Telehealth solutions for both direct clinical care and education. The
Medicare item numbers approved to encourage telemedicine have been helpful but take up by
consultants in general is still slow and the opportunities for allied health practitioners to provide
services through Telehealth are still largely undeveloped despite the obvious compatibilities in
fields such as dietetics, speech pathology and psychology.

k) Manufacturing
RDN has no comments related to health care to make in this section.
l)

Any other related matters
RDN would like to acknowledge the significant contribution made by IMGs to rural health care.
These doctors have not only supported general practice in often very remote locations but have
also allowed even the most basic specialist services to continue at the Base hospitals. It is critical
that the tap is not turned off until there are sustainable solutions in place to attract the Australian
trained health workforce to rural and remote localities.

It is important to recognise that many of the problems impacting the supply of medical practitioners are
also relevant to the wider health workforce including nurses and allied health professionals who are
offered little financial support to relocate to rural and remote settings.
END

This submission has been prepared with the authority of Richard Colbran, Chief Executive Officer of
NSW Rural Doctors Network.

Richard Colbran
Chief Executive Officer

NSW Rural Doctors Network submission to the Senate inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Page 6 of 6

