Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

30 April 2018

Mr Mark Fitt
Committee Secretary
Senate Economic References Committee
PO Box 6100
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Mr Fitt

I write in response to your request for submissions to the ‘Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact
of, regional inequality in Australia’.
Executive Summary
‒

The ability of regional businesses to attract skilled employees depends on a
wide range of factors, including the availability of good social infrastructure, and
the diversity of job options available to accommodate family members.

‒

Migration policies which do not reflect the challenges facing regional South
Australian business work against attracting much needed migrants to the areas
where labour shortages actually exist.

‒

While economic considerations will always need to be measured, the availability
of reliable and cost-competitive utilities underpins many regional industries and
must be ensured by State and Federal Governments.

‒

The natural advantages and disadvantages across regional South Australia
should form part of Government policy directed towards supporting regions.

‒

Overall, the one size fits all approach to government policy in Australia does
sometimes conflict with the unique needs of regional towns, cities and rural
areas and State and Federal Governments need to be less city centric in their
approach to developing the nation’s prosperity.

Should you require any further information or have questions, please contact Andrew McKenna,
Senior Policy Adviser, on (
Yours sincerely,

Anthony Penney
Executive Director, Industry and Government Engagement

ABN 000 14 725 309 328
Level 1, 136 Greenhill Road
Unley South Australia 5061
T: +61 8 8300 0000

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

Why this matter is important to South Australian businesses
As South Australia’s Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Business SA is the peak business membership organisation in
the State. Our members are affected by this matter in the following ways:
‒

Of Business SA’s nearly 3,500 members, approximately 687 are from regional South Australia and we also have
long standing relationships with regional chambers of commerce in the major regional towns and cities.

‒

Business SA has long had a specific focus on supporting regional South Australia, and we regularly run events
and courses in regional towns and cities in conjunction with local chambers of commerce.

‒

Business SA regularly acknowledges the economic contribution of South Australia’s regions, particularly in
relation to the State’s exports, and through our regular interaction with regional businesses we are able to
highlight the issues facing regions through publications such as the Regional Voice.

Key Policy Points:
Regional Voice Report
1. In 2016, Business SA released our inaugural Regional Voice Report to raise the awareness of issues facing businesses
in regional South Australia. This research was based on two surveys of businesses and a collaboration with regional
chambers of commerce throughout the State. Our report uncovered a range of findings, with a key message being the
difficulty that 39 percent of regional businesses faced when attracting skills, even when offering competitive rates of
pay; a figure which reached as high as 56 percent for the South Australia’s South East. Access to training was also a
significant issue, with 33 percent of businesses having to send employees to Adelaide for training which they
considered too expensive.
Not surprisingly, levels of internet and telecommunications access were found to be substantial barriers for regional
businesses and not one respondent to our last regional business survey identified as being an Information Technology
business. This feedback was reiterated in our 2016 Blackout Survey report,1 where for some businesses the loss of
telecommunications and internet access was considered more problematic than the loss of power alone, particularly
on the Eyre Peninsula.
Business SA is currently in the process of updating our regional business survey and will be releasing a revised report
in mid-2018 which we are happy to provide the committee, recognising it may be too late to be considered for this
inquiry.

Note the estimated result from our Blackout Survey Report has been updated to reflect additional costs reported by BHP in February 2017.
Note Adelaide Brighton Cement has also reported power outage costs of $9m for 2016 but did not isolate to specific incidents. Based on the
latest available information, Business SA now estimates the total costs of September 2016’s State-wide blackout to be approximately $450
million.
1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

Relocation of government bodies
2. Last year Business SA responded to a Senate Inquiry into the relocation of government bodies to regional areas. In
summary, while the location of Government Departments and Agencies should primarily be based on the most efficient
long-term cost outcomes for taxpayers, there is a solid argument for agricultural related agencies to be based closer
to the supply chain. Business SA has also had feedback from members that they need more senior Government
decision makers to be based in the regions.
Furthermore, relocating appropriate Government agencies to regional areas can help to broaden the range of jobs
available which helps industry in the regions attract new employees. Government Departments and Agencies also
have a high requirement for strong internet and telecommunications access which again provides a positive externality
to industry.
Population and migration concerns
3. National migration policy, and its consequent effects on South Australia’s population growth, also fuel regional
inequality. South Australia’s population and migration statistics paint a bleak picture. Between the September quarter
2012 and the June quarter 2017, South Australia recorded the lowest population growth of all mainland states, sitting
at 0.6 percent for the year to June 2017, compared to the 1.6 percent national average.2 Within the same period, South
Australia’s net interstate migration was -23,043; more people left South Australia for another State/Territory than
arrived.3 People aged 25-44 years old made up the largest proportion of this cohort leaving South Australia for another
jurisdiction.4 South Australia has not recorded a positive quarter of net interstate migration since the September quarter
of 2002.5 Prior to the September quarter 2002, the only quarter which recorded positive growth was the March quarter
1992. The latest figures show South Australia’s population grew by less in the entire year, than Victoria’s did in a
month.6 South Australia’s population is also ageing, our median age is 40; two years older than the national average.
South Australia’s workforce, the number of people between 15-64 years old, is growing at half the national rate.7
4. This continuous net interstate migration loss, coupled with an ageing population, is contributing to South Australia’s
weakened presence at a national level. Concerningly, this weakened presence will manifest itself in decreased
representation following the next federal election. South Australia will lose one seat in the House of Representatives
in the 46th Parliament. As part of Business SA’s 2018 Charter for a More Prosperous South Australia we called on the
State Government to set a 1.5 percent population growth target and implement practical and creative policies to reach
it.8 Increased population growth is one factor with potential to reduce inequality between South Australia (and South
Australia’s regions) and other jurisdictions.
5. Immigration is a key driver of population growth, and represents an opportunity for policymakers to address regional
inequality around Australia. Where South Australia’s population has grown, this has occurred due to international
migration. Business SA recognises Australia’s migration policy is predominately applied as a ‘one size fits all’, which
ABS, ‘3101.0 Australian Demographic Statistics’.
Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 ABS Cat No. 3101.0 ‘Australian Demographic Statistics Sep 2017’.
6 ABS, ‘Cat No. 3218.0 Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2016-17.’
7 Michael O’Neil and Lauren Kaye, ‘The Aged Structure of the Population and Economic Growth – Does It Matter?’
(Economic Issues Paper No 47, South Australian Centre for Economic Studies, February 2016) p 4.
8 Business SA, ‘2018 Charter for a More Prosperous South Australia, 79 [6.1].
2
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

unfortunately does not accommodate for South Australia’s immigration needs nor address its regional differences. It is
evident that different jurisdictions have different needs. While the East Coast of Australia is dealing with overcrowding
and congestion, South Australia is desperately working to achieve positive population growth. As previously mentioned,
a major concern for South Australia is the loss of our young adult population to interstate cities. This brain drain extends
to our regions, with too many young adults leaving regional communities and the State in search of further
opportunities, taking fresh perspectives and new knowledge with them. Many of these young people do not return to
South Australia, instead starting a family interstate and further contributing to population growth in other jurisdictions.
The latest population figures reiterate South Australia’s slow population growth. Between 2016 and 2017 the greater
Adelaide region grew by 0.7 percent, in comparison to Melbourne which grew by 2.7 percent and Sydney at 2 percent.9
6. The current national, simplistic, approach to immigration policy is making it harder for South Australia, and South
Australia’s regions, to attract the necessary number of overseas migrants to grow populations. This places a strain on
all businesses, specifically regional businesses. For example, national thresholds such as the Temporary Skilled
Migration Income Threshold inadequately consider regional differences across the country. The TSMIT, currently
$53,900, now applies to the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme Visa (subclass 187). Previously the RSMS simply
required a visa holder to be paid the market rate, recognition that wage rates differ in regional areas compared to
Sydney and Melbourne. The TSMIT rate now puts the RSMS visa option out of reach for regional employers seeking
to fill skill gaps in their business; hindering growth in their business and their community. These changes are
significantly affecting South Australia’s ability to attract skilled migrants.
Opportunities exist in South Australia’s regions, where jobs remain unfilled. Vacant positions limit an employer’s ability
to expand their business and slow growth in their area. With our young continuing to flow interstate and our population
ageing we need to ensure every competitive advantage South Australia has as a migration destination is retained.
7. A further example of migration policy causing regional inequality can be found in nominated occupation frameworks.
The range of occupations eligible to be placed on state-nominated occupation lists, such as the (South Australian)
State-Nominated Occupation List, is limited by eligible lists provided by the Australian Government. This restricts the
ability of South Australian businesses to nominate skill shortages in their region and for the South Australian
Government to respond through state-nominated migration. Such policy approaches do not adequately recognise the
needs of South Australia and its employers. As discussed above, the flow on effects of this ‘one size fits all’ immigration
policy approach is reducing South Australia’s ability to attract and retain population; decreasing South Australia’s
proportion of Australia’s population compared to other jurisdictions. Concerningly this has resulted in decreased
representation at a national level, with a 10-seat entitlement, down from an 11-seat entitlement, due at the next federal
election. Inaction by State and Commonwealth government will see inequality, particularly inequality for South
Australia’s regions, perpetuate.

9

ABS, ‘3218.0 – Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2016-17’.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

Skills and Training
8. Skills and training policy offers a response to regional skill shortages that does not rely on overseas or interstate
migration. South Australia’s regions require sound and targeted skills and training policy; a requirement which has not
been fully met. Business SA strongly opposed the State Government’s WorkReady policy which allocated 90 percent
of subsidised training places to TAFE SA. This decision forced some RTOs out of business and threatened the viability
of many others. A Business SA survey of its members in 2015 showed that 16.1 percent of respondents used TAFE
for training, 33.9 percent used private RTOs and 20.3 percent used a mixture of both, demonstrating that employers
want choice in their training providers. It is Business SA’s view that a contestable, open and competitive marketplace
will drive choice for employers in selecting training and assessment and provide courses that comply with current
industry standards and ensures that niche markets are covered.
Business SA believes a vital function of TAFE SA should be to operate in areas of the training market where private
RTOs might not be offering services that the market requires, due to a lack of commercial viability and other constraints.
It needs to be a priority to ensure education is both available and accessible throughout our regions. VET training is
fundamental to the survival of our regions with 25,662 people in the regions attending vocational and educational
training in 2015.10 The most common qualification in regional areas is Certificate III and IV, in comparison to
metropolitan areas where the most common qualification is a university degree or higher. Regional training must seek
to remain relative to each region’s industry needs. For example, Port Augusta City Council has identified that although
TAFE is offering courses in various trade employment areas, the high unemployment rate, the closure of Alinta and
the decline in heavy industry has resulted in a decrease of interest due to a lack of demand for these traditional jobs.11
This concept of ‘training for training’s sake’ is discouraging to both businesses and job seekers. Business SA
encourages opening the South Australian training delivery market to provide a competitive marketplace offering quality
training to meet industry demand, with a significant focus on regional training.
9. The lack of options for regional youth looking to further their education through tertiary pathways is forcing them to
move to Adelaide, an option which is becoming increasingly costly. This has not gone unnoticed within regional
communities, prompting local councils to consider alternative ways of providing university education in their regions.
The idea of a Community Owned Tertiary Education Centre (COTEC) was mentioned in the Port Augusta 2016
Economic Growth and Investment Strategy, an idea prompted by the highly successful model established in Geraldton,
Western Australia. This model is based upon the local community providing both the hard and soft infrastructure,
determining the local needs and tendering out the vocational and tertiary education service provision, and brokering
research partnerships.12 The Geraldton initiative reports a retention and graduation rate of 95 percent.13

Report generated from WorkReady, ‘Workforce Wizard’ Government of South Australia, (as at 31 January 2018).
Port Augusta City Council, Economic Growth and Investment Strategy, April 2016, page 32.
12 Port Augusta City Council, Economic Growth and Investment Strategy, April 2016, page 33.
13 Ibid.
10
11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

10. In South Australia, registration with Traineeship and Apprenticeship Services (TAS) is required to employ and train
apprentices and trainees; this is the only jurisdiction to require the registration of employers prior to formalising a
contract of training. The current registration process is onerous for businesses, often significantly delaying the
commencement of training contracts with apprentices and trainees. In regional areas, this delay can extend to as long
as six weeks. This acts as a deterrent for employers seeking apprentices and trainees, and for job seekers whom may
otherwise search for employment in metro areas to avoid this wait time. Business SA supports a modernisation of the
registration system, to reduce the gap between the employer application and commencement date for the apprentice
or trainee.
Electricity Reliability
11. Reliability and costs of all essential services are critical to the viability of regional industry, but Business SA wishes to
highlight the impacts of electricity unreliability on South Australia’s regions, particularly the Eyre Peninsula. The spate
of power losses, including the prolonged state-wide blackout, has recently been subject of a special inquiry by South
Australia’s Essential Services Commission under instruction from the State Government.
The blackout events highlighted the vulnerability of Port Lincoln customers which were particularly exposed given
businesses expected the regional city’s backup generator to provide support in the event of a network failure. Furthermore,
the September 28 blackout on the Eyre Peninsula lasted for more than two days, after the failure of the backup generator,
while the majority of the State had power restored the same night.
Business SA’s final estimate of the cost of the blackout was $450 million and in our Blackout Survey Results14, we indicated
the likely cost to the Eyre Peninsula alone was $8.33 million with the median cost to businesses $9,626, almost twice the
State-wide median cost of $5,000. Eyre Peninsula businesses were also heavily impacted by a loss of communications,
including internet, which, as mentioned earlier, for some businesses was more problematic than impacts from the loss of
electricity alone.
Business SA acknowledges ESCOSA’s findings that between 1 July 2016 and 31 December 2016, the Unplanned System
Average Interruption Duration Index (USAIDI) for the Eyre Peninsula was nearly 3,400 minutes, or approximately 57 hours,
of which generation/transmission outages comprised approximately 2,600 minutes (43 hours). This compares with the 10year average of 530 minutes (9 hours) with an average of 400 minutes (7 hours) over the past three years.
Recognising the State-wide blackout was not the entire cause and even setting aside the causes of the blackout established
by various inquiries, the reality is that businesses and consumers on the Eyre Peninsula have suffered immensely from
unreliable electricity in the last six months of 2016 and reasonable steps must be taken to mitigate against future
occurrences. While Business SA acknowledges reliability standards cannot be uniform across the entire state due to
economic reasons, we also cannot accept such significant shortcomings in reliability in regional areas when those same
consumers should have commensurate protections under the National Electricity Law.

14

Business SA, Blackout Survey Results, December 2016.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

12. In Business SA’s initial submission to ESCOSA’s 2013 review of SA Power Networks’ (SAPN) service stands, we stated:
‘We prefer the continuation of regionally based reliability standards. It is important to continue monitoring and reporting on
the quantity and impacts of Low Reliability Distribution Feeders, particularly given the majority tend to be in rural and regional
South Australia. Not only will this highlight what is most in need of upgrading, it will ensure SAPN maintains a focus on
improving outcomes for rural and regional customers.’
While we acknowledge ESCOSA’s decision then to shift SAPN to reliability standards based on network feeder categories
was to better align with the Australian Energy Regulator (AER) Service Target Performance Incentive Scheme, the recent
spate of unreliability has highlighted the need to ensure that reliability in specific rural and regional areas is appropriately
regulated for.
Other examples of regional inequality
13. Business SA recognises both the State and Federal Government’s strong focus on road safety and the need to ensure
learner drivers have adequate experience and competence before obtaining their probationary licence. We are not
advocating a lessening of licence requirements if there is strong evidence to suggest they are necessary to save lives.
However, we have been provided feedback that the 75-hour supervised driving requirement is quite onerous on
regional youth from disadvantaged families who cannot easily access the required driver training through a friend or
family member and are not in a position to be able to afford professional training. If young people are not licenced in
rural areas then driving to and from work, not to mention agricultural jobs which require driving considerable distances,
is quite prohibitive due to limited public transport. Employers have consistently told Business SA that more young
people would have a better chance of securing employment in the regions if there was a mechanism to overcome
access difficulties when meeting the log book requirements. There should be consideration given for measures which
increase the practical accessibility of driver training for disadvantaged regional youth, whether that be through some
form of subsidy or support for NGOs to facilitate that training through volunteers.
Prior to the latest Labour Force figures released on the 19 of April, South Australia has long maintained the highest
youth unemployment rate among all other states. Business SA reiterates the need for all reasonable options to be
considered to help alleviate this situation.15
14. Economic diversification is a continuous talking point for South Australia’s regional towns. However, for many, their
geographical location is a significant determining factor of prosperity, and potentially inequality. While some are able
to reap the benefits of the coast and/or being surrounded by agricultural land, others are more dependent on single
industry. For example, Port Lincoln, a coastal city on the Eyre Peninsula with a population of 14,064,16 has created a
vibrant regional economy through a successful seafood industry, rich agricultural land and a growing tourism sector.
Alternatively, other regional towns such as Whyalla and Port Augusta are much more dependent on major industry
employers and accordingly, are more likely to require support to achieve structural economic change. In the case of
Whyalla, where local businesses and governments at all levels have been willing to work together to support major
industry, securing the future of the steelworks has been achieved. While Port Augusta’s situation is different after losing
its major employer in the Northern Power Station, it has still been able to attract a significant industrial facility in the
high-tech Sundrop Farms, and will also benefit from the soon to be constructed Solar Reserve solar thermal plant, not
15
16

ABS, ‘6202.0- Labour Force, Australia, March 2018’.
ABS ‘2016 Census QuickStats, Port Lincoln’.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 29

to mention other significant solar developments in the region. As with Whyalla, Solar Reserve was secured through
both State and Federal Government support. Business SA highlights these examples to demonstrate what can be
achieved when governments of different political persuasions work together and prioritise the best interests of a region.
Conclusion
Australia is a vast nation and the characteristics of jurisdictions and regions will vary significantly. While not always the
case, as indicated above there can be a general ‘one size fits all’ approach to government policy in Australia. National
migration policy disadvantages regional areas unable to attract the skilled migrants they require. Skills and training
policy offers an opportunity to address regional skill shortages, however the right courses and support must be offered.
Utility and communications reliability, such as electricity and mobile/internet, is critical for regional areas. Outages can
affect these communities more severely than their metropolitan counterparts. More specific issues, such as drivers
licence requirement difficulties and regional economic diversity, can also lead to regional inequality. The ‘one size fits
all’ approach can conflict with the unique needs of regional towns, cities and rural areas. State and Federal
Governments should do more to cater to these regional needs in developing the nation’s prosperity.

