Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 3

20 April 2018

Mark Fitt
Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
By email: economics.sen@aph.gov.au

Dear Mr Fitt,
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
The Law Council welcomes the opportunity to provide feedback to the Senate Standing
Committee on Economics (the Committee) in relation to its inquiry into the indicators of,
and impact of, regional inequality in Australia (the Inquiry).
The Terms of Reference for the Inquiry include the indicators of, and impact of, regional
inequality in Australia, with particular reference to government policies and programs in
the following areas:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
j)
k)
l)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
regional development policies;
infrastructure;
education;
building human capital;
enhancing local workforce skills;
employment arrangements;
decentralisation policies;
innovation;
manufacturing; and
any other related matters.

The Law Council recommends that the Committee consider including access to legal
services in the terms of reference for the Inquiry.
The Law Council is concerned about the shortages of local lawyers in rural, regional and
remote (RRR) areas of Australia. While almost 30 per cent of Australians live outside

Telephone +61 2 6246 3788 • Fax +61 2 6248 0639 • Email mail@lawcouncil.asn.au
GPO Box 1989, Canberra ACT 2601, DX 5719 Canberra • 19 Torrens St Braddon ACT 2612
Law Council of Australia Limited ABN 85 005 260 622
www.lawcouncil.asn.au

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 3

major cities in a country or rural area,1 national data on practising solicitors indicates that
just 10.5 per cent of solicitors nationally practice in these areas.2
Significant concerns have been expressed regarding the levels of unmet legal need in
RRR communities, particularly in remote communities. Scarcities of locally available
lawyers can create conflict of interest problems and impose significant additional cost and
distance burdens on residents, who need to travel further to find help. In areas without
lawyers, individuals either need to travel long distances to seek help or go without
assistance.
This year the Law Council of Australia launched the Justice Project, a comprehensive
national review into the state of access to justice in Australia, focusing on challenges for
people who experience disadvantage under our justice system, including people residing in
RRR parts of Australia. This project has launched a range of consultation papers relating to
13 groups identified in the terms of reference, which are available here.
One of the key findings of the Justice Project is that people living in RRR areas
experience legal problems slightly less often than those in major cities, but are more likely
to experience multiple legal problems. The decline in population in certain RRR areas
results in pockets of concentrated disadvantage, with high numbers of residents who are
with disability, unemployed, elderly, sick, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples. These residents can be very vulnerable to multiple legal and non-legal
problems, and may lack the ability to resolve legal problems on their own.
There are a number of barriers constraining this group from accessing justice, including
economic exclusion. In addition to cost, key barriers include distance and a lack of public
transport, and technological barriers including poor quality internet access and limited
telephone services, particularly in more remote areas. Poor health, limited literacy and
education levels, as well as communication difficulties and mistrust of the system
(particularly amongst many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander residents) presents
severe barriers for considerably disadvantaged RRR residents.
Decreases in local court services in RRR communities further exacerbate distance and
cost barriers for individuals. RRR residents are often disadvantaged by a lack of local
access to courts, particularly in smaller towns and more remote areas, as well as
uncertainties in regional circuit dates, infrequent sittings, poor court amenities and
infrastructure, and limited access to tribunals. A lack of quality alternative dispute
resolution services, specialist courts, diversionary programs and support services which
underpin alternative sentencing options have also been identified, further disadvantaging
residents.
It is important to ensure that there is a rural dimension to access to justice discussions, so
that law and policy can be considered in the context of application in RRR communities.

1

Figures are based on the estimated resident population, which refers to the number of usual residents in a
region. The definition of usual residence in the Census is the location where a person spends more than six
months out of the year: Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development (‘DIRD’), Progress in
Australian Regions – Yearbook 2016 (Australian Government: 2016), 172, citing Australian Bureau of
Statistics (‘ABS’), Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2014-15 (cat. No. 3218.0).
2
Barristers are not included: Urbis, 2016 Law Society National Profile of Solicitors 2016 Report (2017).
https://www.lawsociety.com.au/resources/surveysandstatistics/index.htm, 29.

L - Regional Inequality in Australia

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 3

For instance, while technology is an important consideration for RRR communities, many
disadvantaged communities lack access to technology or the skills to use it effectively,
and local advice provided face-to-face is often what residents trust best. Some laws can
also have a vastly disproportionate effect on such communities - for example, mandatory
loss of licences for driving offences.
Given the diversity amongst RRR communities, area-specific, tailored and multi-faceted
responses are required to address the specific needs of communities, as opposed to
‘blanket’ solutions informed by local data and priorities.
The Law Council considers a lack of access to legal services to be an important indicator
of regional inequality in Australia impacting RRR communities, and for this reason it
recommends that the Committee include access to legal services in the terms of reference
for the Inquiry.
The RRR Australians Consultation Paper is available on the Law Council’s website at
URL: https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/justice-project/consultation-papers, and the final
report will be released later this year.
Please

contact

Emma

information at this time.
Yours sincerely

Jonathan Smithers
Chief Executive Officer

L - Regional Inequality in Australia

Hlubucek
on
or
at
in the first instance, should you require further

