Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30

The indicators of, and impact of, regional
inequality in Australia
Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee,
from the Town of Port Hedland
April, 2018
The Town of Port Hedland (ToPH) is a local government area located approximately 1,800km north of Perth
in the remote Pilbara Region of Western Australia (WA). The Pilbara Region represents a massive land mass
in the North West of Australia. At the 2016 Census, the population for the Pilbara Region was 46,532. It
incorporates a rich Aboriginal heritage dating back over 40,000 years, exceptionally unique and exquisite
natural landscapes and currently functions as the ‘economic powerhouse of the Nation’ due to its extensive
mineral and hydrocarbon assets and close proximity to existing and emerging high demand Asian markets.
However, more recently there has been a significant contraction in both mineral prices and subsequently,
economic, employment and community investment in the Pilbara Region is entering a new phase.
The ToPH comprises the twin towns of Port Hedland and South Hedland (located approximately 18km
apart), the Wedgefield Industrial Area and the iron ore crushing and shipping facilities. Also part of the ToPH
are the Aboriginal communities of Jinparinya, Marta Marta, Punju Njamal, Tkalka Boorda and Tjalka Wara
Community (12 Mile) and Yandeyarra. The ToPH covers 11,844 square kilometres of the Pilbara region. At
the 2016 Census, the population for the ToPH was 14,469. Aboriginal / Torres Strait Islander people
comprise 16.7 per cent of the population. As the municipal authority for this local government area, the
ToPH is responsible for public administration associated with planning, community development, events,
management of town infrastructure and facilities, management of environmental aspects, local economic
development and ranger services.
The ToPH boasts many economic assets. The Port itself is the largest bulk export port in the world and
serves as the ‘maritime gateway’ for the Pilbara Region and its inherent resource industries. In 2016, the
Pilbara Region accounted for 94 per cent of Australia’s iron ore exports. The iron ore industry is a large part
of WA’s economy, accounting for 65 per cent of the value added by its mining industry and 15 per cent of
its gross state product in 2015-16. In 2016-17, iron ore exports from Port Hedland reached 469 million
tonnes (58 per cent of Western Australia’s exports). Although primarily servicing the iron ore industry, Port
Hedland also supports other major resource activities, including offshore natural gas fields, pastoralism,
salt flats and nearby manganese, copper and titanium mines. Major employers in the ToPH are BHP
Billiton’s iron ore processing and shipping facility and its associated enterprises and Dampier Salt (a
subsidiary of Rio Tinto), which produces three million tonnes of industrial salt annually. More recently,
developments by Pilbara Minerals to establish the biggest Lithium mining and processing operations in the
world are underway with the $234 million Pilgangoora Lithium-Tantalum Project, located just 120km south
of Port Hedland.
An awareness of the ToPH’s globally unique assets and significant contribution to the national economy
and global resource markets is imperative to gain cognisance and highlight the impacts and indicators of
regional inequality experienced by its residents.
The ToPH and its residents are not immune to the same set of challenges which plague WA’s non
metropolitan regions; namely – lack of an understanding of the realities and potential of the region by policy
makers in Perth and Canberra; lack of strong local leadership and vision; few economies of scale as a direct
result of the sheer size, scale and remoteness of regional WA; high cost of doing business; inadequate
economic and social infrastructure (in particular transport, communications, health and education); lack of
ability to attract and retain a sustainable population; a growing ageing population; unequal opportunities
Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30

and a lack of involvement in regional development by Aboriginal people; sub-optimal land use; and poor
partnerships and low levels of engagement between community, business and government (CEDA, 2016).
These aforementioned challenges create broad impacts; namely – impediments to regional growth and
development; reduction of regional amenity and liveability; hampering of the development and execution
of practical responses to realise the unique potential of characteristic regional assets; a poorly skilled local
workforce and regional ‘brain drain’; contribution to the continuous exodus of families and young people
due to a lack of education, training and employment opportunities; a strain on already stretched services;
and poor health, education and employment outcomes, particularly for Aboriginal people.
In response to the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality pertinent to the ToPH, a set of key Port
Hedland residents with pivotal roles and strong connections to community, industry and government were
interviewed to inform the Terms of Reference for this Submission. Their responses are captured below.
a) Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels:
 At the federal level, funding streams and sources are available; however, due to a lack of
coordination between the three tiers of government and poor local leadership, these sources are
not utilised to their full potential.
 State funding has become extremely tight and this is impacting heavily on the delivery of services.
Funding cuts are forcing government agencies and non-government organisations (NGO’s) to
rethink the way services are delivered and establish dynamic partnerships that maximise and share
resources. More support is needed to facilitate this shift and encourage innovation. Fear of
amalgamation, the tendency to work in ‘silos’ and the competitive nature of tendering processes
are serious impediments to improved coordination and collaboration between service providers.
Incentives are required to attract and retain staff along with greater flexibility around funding
arrangements. Successful funding programs are often shut down due to short term funding cycles
and lack of foresight in policy changes.
 In terms of funding parameters, a disregard for the higher costs associated with service delivery in
the Pilbara and difficulties associated with attracting and retaining adequately skilled and qualified
staff, results in the perpetual delivery of sub-standard services.
 There are greater expectations on the range of services delivered by local governments in remote
areas as opposed to metropolitan areas. However, local governments in remote areas have a much
smaller rate base and higher costs associated with distance. This needs to be given due
consideration.
 Based on GST distribution for the upcoming financial year, WA remains the only state/territory that
receives less than half of the GST it generates. This will be the sixth year in a row that WA has not
received even half of its population share of GST. This disparity in GST distribution is highlighted by
the significant contribution that the Pilbara’s resource industry makes to the national economy.
 The ToPH is also disadvantaged by the aforementioned ‘twin town’ dynamic. Applications for
federal funding have been declined as a result of a failure to recognise the infrastructural nuances
inherent with this anomaly.
b) Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies:
 A lack of meaningful and strategic collaboration and coordination between the three tiers of
government causes a disconnect in policy direction. If government policies are to have a meaningful
impact in regional and remote regions, all three tiers of government need to address the damaging
tendency to work in ‘silos’.
 The Australian Government’s first ever White Paper on Developing Northern Australia (released
June, 2015), is a vision to unlock the great potential and opportunities of the North. It focuses
on infrastructure development and economic diversification aimed at attracting and retaining
population and economic growth. However, the common perception is that this Policy lacks
impetus translating into little action on the ground. It is viewed as tokenistic, insincere and ill
informed.
 Improved policy coordination and implementation, particularly within the public sector is strongly
affected by high staff turnover, short term funding arrangements and the transient nature of
Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30



communities built on the backbone of the resource industry. These factors consistently interrupt
the long term trajectory and commitment required for successful policy implementation.
There is insufficient coordination and conversation with local government by state and federal
governments around issues particular to individual regions. Given the scale of mining operations in
the Pilbara, local government is not always adequately consulted, especially with regard to the
resource sector and its impacts, both adverse and beneficial. This is especially pertinent for the
ToPH and the value generated by the operations of the Port itself, subsequent trade through the
Port to the Pilbara, Western Australian and the national economy and, corresponding relations with
international markets and overseas investors. Poor policy coordination results in a failure to
maximise regional potential and capitalise on assets.

c) Regional development policies:
 There is a strong perception that regional development policies are dominated by state and federal
government perspectives. This is evidenced in an obvious lack of knowledge of the assets and
challenges particular to Northern Australia. An example cited by one interviewee was an oversight
at the most recent Annual Developing Northern Australia Conference (2017) to acknowledge that
Port Hedland does, in fact, have an international airport. In terms of creating economic
diversification, this oversight fails to acknowledge this significant asset in realising the Region’s
tourism potential to overseas markets.
 The focus of regional councils can be ad hoc. The recent commitment by the Pilbara Regional
Council to focus on and invest in tourism infrastructure highlights the lack of a coordinated
approach with federal government policies as proved by the aforementioned airport example.
 Without improved communication and coordination by state and federal governments with local
government, and much greater input from community, the implementation of regional
development policies will fail to align with the actions necessary for sustainable growth and
development. The formulation of sound regional development policies requires strong local input.
 A long standing issue for ToPH residents is the cost of airfares to the Region which are heavily
inflated due to the dominance of the resource industry. Inflated airfares isolate residents not
connected to the resource industry and accentuates the Region’s remote location. It also hampers
liveability, amenity and economic diversification as the growth of small business and tourism
development are stalled due to costs associated with accessibility. QANTAS has recently offered
some concession to ToPH residents; however, these are heavily restricted and not at all tailored to
support economic diversification.
 There is a perception that commitment to development in regional Australia is at the whim of
changing government administrations, and the recent state government shift back to a
metrocentric mentality is damaging to the national interest. This is especially relevant to the Pilbara
region and its strong role in both state and national economies.
d) Infrastructure:
 A lack of investment and bureaucratic assistance to remove red tape associated with transport and
communications infrastructure strongly impedes economic growth and development. This
oversight by the state and federal governments reveals a disconnect with the reality of the
significance and potential of the ToPH to both state and national economies. Particular issues are
the expansion of the Port and its operations and, poor internet connectivity and speed.
 Road blocks imposed by government relating to the expansion of the Port, and an inability to find
solutions to have them removed, are seen as detrimental to the growth of the ToPH and the
national interest. It is estimated that 3000-5000 jobs will be generated through the Port’s
expansion. The Port Hedland Port supply chain alone contributed $30 billion in economic output to
the Australian economy in 2015-16. This is equivalent to 1.9% of Australia’s GDP, or approximately
three quarters of the total annual economic output of Australia’s agriculture, forestry and fisheries
industry (Port Hedland Industries Council, 2017).
 The dominating presence of resource companies and associated multi nationals provides tough
competition for small businesses in the Region. Many small businesses in the Pilbara are really
struggling to survive. A thriving small business community is the backbone of a strong and
sustainable regional economy and community. A commitment to supporting local service providers
Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30















and creating incentives that mitigate the crippling high costs experienced by small businesses
operating in the Region is vital to the sustainable development of a strong local economy and
subsequent population attraction and retention. Options focussed on supporting and encouraging
the collaboration of smaller companies to form consortiums to apply for tenders should also be
explored.
The cost of electricity in the Region is notoriously high. The development of renewable energy
sources in the Region is vital in securing a sustainable future. The development of this industry will
also create jobs and address long standing issues associated with economies of scale and
affordability in the delivery of this utility. Many Aboriginal communities depend on diesel
generators for power. Notwithstanding the high costs, during the wet season, road blockages can
result in some communities going without power for weeks. The development of solar energy in
these communities could greatly improve quality of life. New Energy’s waste to energy facility in
Port Hedland set to open later this year represents a partnership with the ToPH focussed on an
innovative and proactive response to both renewable energy and waste management. Given the
Region’s climate, greater investment in solar power infrastructure is required to take advantage of
this abundant source of renewable energy.
The ToPH has made significant investments in social infrastructure based on projected population
growth. Following the recent economic downturn experienced by the resource sector, the expected
rise in population has not been forthcoming. This has resulted in an asset backlog that must now
be maintained coupled with the challenge of a smaller and declining rate base. The Wanangkura
Stadium in South Hedland is an example of such an asset. Planning and development of social
infrastructure should take an iterative approach that will allow for flexibility in responding to the
population highs and lows that are a notorious characteristic of the ‘boom and bust’ nature of the
mining industry.
The aforementioned ‘twin town’ dynamic of the ToPH is an anomaly which presents infrastructural
challenges in terms of the allocation of services and facilities. Transport between the two centres
can be a challenge for residents who do not drive.
A lack of adequate housing stock, particularly for families and ageing residents makes it difficult to
maintain a sustainable population. Strong partnerships with resident resource companies that
focus on establishing housing infrastructure that will grow and sustain a permanent local
population are vital.
The Pilbara displays two main indicators of health inequality in WA – socio-economic disadvantage
and a large Aboriginal population. Hedland Health Campus is one of the Region’s major health
service providers; however, access to mental health and specialist services is still limited, or nonexistent. The delivery of health services to remote Aboriginal communities involves high costs.
Aboriginal Medical Services operating in the ToPH are often presented with complex health issues
for which they do not have the adequate resources to address. Data on health care shows a decline
in positive outcomes and quality of service with increasing distance from metropolitan areas. For
example, a recent study by the WA Primary Health Alliance found that the Pilbara is the site of the
second-highest number of preventable hospitalisation cases in WA, with South Hedland cited as a
hotspot for seven of the top 10 conditions by volume (of people). Investment in digital technology,
for example, telehealth and e-health records could help to deliver better health services to the
Region.
The delivery and maintenance of infrastructure in remote Aboriginal communities is particularly
challenging due to high costs and complicated logistics associated with long travel distances and
harsh physical environments.
Adequate health, education and employment options and opportunities are critical to liveability.
Ultimately, the majority of people do not, or cannot stay in places with poor amenity resulting from
inadequate infrastructure and opportunities. A consequence of this is that transient communities
find it harder to build social capital and connection, and this results in a prevalence of social issues
such as substance abuse and domestic violence. There is a common misconception that within the
ToPH these social issues are generally isolated to the Aboriginal community. This is not the case.
The complex relationship between infrastructure development and population growth particular
to remote and regional areas is a huge challenge to economic growth and enhancing liveability and
amenity. The ToPH is no stranger to this reality. Retaining an adequate and sustainable population
Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30

is necessary to create economies of scale. Conversely, the ability to attract and retain population
depends on achieving scale (CEDA, 2016). This situation becomes a vicious cycle.
e) Education:
 A distinct lack of secondary and tertiary education opportunities in the ToPH results in poor
education outcomes and amenity. Many families tend to leave when their children are due to enter
secondary or tertiary education.
 Hedland Senior High School is the only secondary education option for ToPH residents. In 2017, it
ranked among the lowest in the State for average score and completion rate. Students display
challenging social issues and teachers are exposed to intimidating and threatening behaviour on a
regular basis. Teachers are not trained in cultural competence which impacts their ability to engage
and respond to Aboriginal students. Educational outcomes become difficult to deliver when social
issues dominate the learning environment. Resources to address social issues, incentives to attract
and retain specialised staff and support and training for teachers is required to improve the quality
of education.
 Across the ToPH, schools are poorly equipped and under resourced to deal with the behavioural
and learning challenges of students affected by Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD). FASD is
especially prevalent in the Pilbara’s Aboriginal population.
f) Building human capital:
 Resource companies need to restrict their use of FIFO employment models and redirect investment
from camps into improving the liveability and amenity of towns. All efforts should be directed
towards establishing and growing a more permanent local population which will build human
capital.
 A continuous and targeted effort to increase the participation of Aboriginals in the local economy
should align with economic diversification projects and land management practices. Special
attention should be paid to the particular cultural requirements and complex social issues that may
impede or enhance involvement. For example, Ranger Programs not only harness the cultural
knowledge of Aboriginal people and provide meaningful employment, they also result in good land
management practices vital in maintaining the unique environmental assets of the Pilbara Region,
which are especially vulnerable to the activities of the resource industry.
g) Enhancing local workforce skills:
 A refocus by government on upskilling the workforce out of school into traineeships and
apprenticeships as opposed to IT and tertiary education is especially relevant to the Pilbara Region.
More incentives for companies and service providers to take on apprentices and trainees should be
made available. For example, additional funding to retain the Aboriginal School Based Traineeships
(ASBT) is missing in the Northwest. This does not make sense given the high Aboriginal population.
 North Regional TAFE offers limited courses that often fail to align with or create regional
employment opportunities. Recent funding cuts by state and federal governments saw the axing of
bridging and literacy courses. These courses are vital for prospective apprentices and trainees.
 The cost of doing business in the Pilbara impacts on the delivery of quality training opportunities
and choice. Partnerships and incentives between the public and private sectors that could increase
training opportunities in the Pilbara should be explored. There is also much more potential for elearning and digital technologies to play a stronger role in creating better education and training
outcomes.
h) Employment arrangements:
 FIFO employment arrangements are damaging to the social fabric of regional communities. They
also place a strain on family life with the regular absence of one parent. Resource companies need
to move away from this model by investing in regional liveability and amenity that is critical to
attracting and retaining a permanent population.
 The effects of technology and automation in terms of job losses within the resource sector are
already being felt. This highlights the need to both reduce the reliance on the resource industry for
employment and, make a stronger commitment to economic diversification. Economic
Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30




diversification ideas are floated on a regular basis, but are not gaining traction on the ground. The
ToPH has significant opportunities for economic diversification but these can only be activated with
the right support.
Greater flexibility and allowances for staff is especially relevant to the Pilbara region as families
often relocate for lucrative employment opportunities leaving extended family and other support
networks behind.
The high wages paid to employees by the resources industry cannot be matched by other sectors.
This creates a socio-economic divide between those who work for the resource industry and those
who do not. The dominance of the resource industry drives the misconception that everyone earns
a high wage and social disadvantage does not exist. This is not the reality and those employed
outside the resource sector struggle with the Region’s affordability, or lack thereof. A prime
example is the inflated airfare prices which remain some of the highest in the country. Taxation
benefits (for example, a progressive taxation arrangement with differentiated scales based on
regional characteristics) and incentives for employees outside of the resource industry would help
to alleviate financial strain and retain staff.

i) Decentralisation policies:
 Most of the major players in the Pilbara do not have regional offices. Government departments,
resource companies, multi nationals and many NGO’s tend to run operations from metropolitan
areas. This creates a situation where decision makers lose touch with local realities and ultimately
make poor decisions that serve the interests of no one. A commitment to creating a permanent or
regular physical presence in the Region by such parties is imperative in achieving better outcomes.
j) Innovation:
 There is not enough investment in innovation across the nation. Any innovation that does emerge
from Australia is snapped up and further developed overseas. What funding there is for innovation
tends to be focussed on the metropolitan areas and becomes a trickle by the time it reaches
regional WA.
 The activities and assets of the resource industry provides a highly conducive environment for
innovation to flourish. This should be taken greater advantage of.
 Given the climate of the Pilbara and other physical assets, there is a great deal of potential in
developing solar energy innovations, and other alternative energy sources, for example, tidal
energy.
 The development of the Web Business Hub, Port Hedland’s first co-working and innovation centre,
is a prime example of a dynamic partnership that sought to create a facility designed to support
innovation in business and facilitate local training and education opportunities. More of these types
of partnerships and projects need to encouraged and supported.

Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30

References and Bibliography:
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2017). Port Hedland (T). 2016 Census QuickStats. [online] Available at:
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/LGA57280
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. (2016). Australia’s health 2016. Australia’s health series no. 15.
Cat. no. AUS 199. Canberra: AIHW. [online] Available at: https://www.aihw.gov.au/getmedia/6d6c93315abf-49ca-827b-e1df177ab0d3/ah16-5-11-rural-remote-health.pdf.aspx
Centre for Economic Development Australia (CEDA). (2016). Regional development in Western Australia.
CEDA State of the Regions Series. [online] Available at:
http://www.drd.wa.gov.au/Publications/Documents/CEDA%20WA%20State%20of%20the%20Regions%2
0report.pdf
Commonwealth of Australia. (2016). Our North, Our Future, White Paper on Developing Northern
Australia. [online] Available at:
http://northernaustralia.gov.au/files/files/NAWP-FullReport.pdf
Foster, B. (2017). Port Hedland school in lockdown crisis after students threaten teachers. WAtoday.
[online] Available at: http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/port-hedland-school-in-lockdown-crisisafter-students-threaten-teachers-20170821-gy0sjl.html
Government of Western Australia. (2017). Western Australia Iron Ore Industry Profile. Department of
Jobs, Tourism, Science and Innovation. [online] Available at: https://www.jtsi.wa.gov.au/docs/defaultsource/default-document-library/wa-iron-ore-profile---august-2017.pdf?sfvrsn=2
Horn, A. (2014). Northern Australia: Transport subsidies and new airports needed to boost international
tourism, experts say. ABC News. [online] Available at: http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-0822/northern-australia-needs-new-international-airports-experts-say/5682154
Lambe, K. (2017). Qantas offers discounted return fares for regional WA passengers in bid to ease pain.
ABC News. [online] Available at: http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-09-01/qantas-seeks-to-ease-pain-forregional-wa-passengers/8864114
Laurie, V. (2017). Dreams in the dust: How the Pilbara dream collapsed. The Australian. [online] Available
at: https://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/how-the-pilbara-dreamcollapsed/news-story/79d6bd908b58c7fc9b5cb26699ed126c
McKinnon, S. (2017). Pilbara Plans to be Leader in Lithium. The West Australian. [online] Available at:
https://thewest.com.au/business/mining/pilbara-minerals-plans-to-be-leader-in-lithium-ng-b88642845z
New Energy Corp. (2016). New Energy and Town of Port Hedland sign 20 year Waste and Renewable
Power Services Agreement. Media Release. [online] Available at:
http://www.newenergycorp.com.au/news-and-media/news/full/new-energy-and-town-of-port-hedlandsign-20-year-waste-and-renewable-power-services-agreement
Ng, J. (2016). Port Hedland iron exports reach record. Financial Review. [online] Available at:
http://www.afr.com/business/mining/iron-ore/port-hedland-iron-ore-exports-reach-record-20160405gnzab8
Perera, A. (2017). Pilbara Second Highest for Preventable Hospitalisations. Pilbara News. [online]
Available at: https://thewest.com.au/news/pilbara-news/pilbara-second-highest-for-preventablehospitalisations-ng-b88682801z

Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 30

Perpitch, N. (2018). GST redistribution delivers boosts to WA and Victoria, but NT and Queensland set to
lose out. ABC News. [online] Available at: http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-04-05/gst-redistributiondelivers-a-small-boost-to-wa/9622532
Pilbara Development Commission. (2017). Construction underway on the Web Business Hub. Media
Release. [online] Available at: https://www.pdc.wa.gov.au/news-media-2/news-media/constructionunderway-web-business-hub
Pilbara Regional Council. (2017). Pilbara Regional Council Official Website. [online] Available at:
https://www.prc.wa.gov.au/ and https://www.prc.wa.gov.au/advocacy/regional-flights/
Port Hedland Industries Council. (2017). An Economic Study of Port Hedland Port. ACIL Allen Consulting.
[online] Available at: http://phic-hedland.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/an-economic-study-ofport-hedland-port_nov-17.pdf
WA Primary Health Alliance. (2016). Pilbara – population and health snapshot. Rural Health West:
Outreach in the Outback. [online] Available at: http://www.wapha.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2015/12/Regional-Profile-2016-Pilbara-population-and-health-snapshot-FINAL.pdf
Zaunmayr, T. (2018). Pilbara school ATAR results among the lowest in WA. The West Australian. [online]
Available at: https://thewest.com.au/news/pilbara-news/pilbara-school-atar-results-among-lowest-inwa-ng-b88708936z

Submission to the Senate: Town of Port Hedland: Regional Inequality

8

