Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

Enquiries to:
Direct Line:
Email:
Reference

Executive Assistant
(02) 6757 3222
council@mpsc.nsw.gov.au
FILE12/2623 FILE17/894 LR:LC

30 April 2018
Senate Standing Committee on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Via email economics.sen@aph.gov.au and an online submission

To whom it may concern,
Submission to inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Thank you for the opportunity to provide a submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact
of, regional inequality in Australia.
The impact of regional inequality is widespread and negatively impacts both the short and long term
future of regional Australia. The consideration, attention and benefits that larger/city communities
receives grossly outweighs that of regional and rural tax payers and residents. It is questionable if many
politicians have an inkling of what it is like to live in regional Australia where we are faced with lower
levels of services, logistical difficulties, increased costs of living and a largely unsympathetic and
unknowing bureaucracy. The principal of horizontal equalisation has failed in that there is a growing
disparity between major metropolitan and coastal growth areas and the balance of the country.
The key to regional sustainability is growing the regional population. Providing quality health and
education services, community facilities and effective transport are key elements in improving quality of
life. More support should be given to local government authorities who are the main level of
government with the knowledge and skills to facilitate growing and maintaining their population. Empty
shop fronts that line main streets, a lack of facilities such as indoor sporting halls, poor road conditions
and a lack of funding for ongoing maintenance are both a product of and a reason for population
decline. Struggling communities are impacted by the ability to attract skilled workers to our towns which
in turn affects the ability to provide quality education opportunities and keep families local. The
economic sustainability of our Shire is threatened by the inability to create an attractive “brand” unless
this is backed by the services and support that populations need.
There is a clear need for mandated universal service obligations across key areas. It cannot be possible
for regional Australia to survive without long-term investment in infrastructure, health, education,
reliable and cost effective internet access and by growing the regional population. Major areas of
concern include the infrastructure, distribution of the Financial Assistance Grants at both the state and
federal level and the overall regional governance and policy framework and associated government
decisions. These issues arise both between Metropolitan and coastal growth areas and regional and
rural Australia but also within regional and rural Australia. These key areas expanded further below:

PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 1 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

Infrastructure
Infrastructure for regional Australia includes roads, airports, inland rail, telecommunications, water
reserves and community facilities including health and education.
Roads - to support production and access to services
Roads are not only a means of getting from A to B in regional Australia, they are the backbone of
industry and underpin the primary production sector both in terms of agricultural productivity and also
extractive industry. Taking the example of Moree Plains Shire, the Shire is the most productive
agricultural local government area in Australia. The value of the last main harvest approached $1 billion.
Much of this product is exported yet, our roads are falling apart and Council barely has enough money to
maintain even a small proportion of what they have to manage.
The Shire’s roads, placed end to end, would stretch from Melbourne to Cairns. Council can only afford to
maintain 750km of sealed roads with the rest either gravel or natural soil. Gravel roads are beyond
Council’s ability to maintain and essentially the majority of the road network will be natural soil within
five years. Soils in the area are known as black soils and while natural soil roads have good bearing
capacity when dry, they are impassable when wet.
In order to maintain and to develop agricultural productivity particularly as we move towards just-intime logistics systems, requires an all-weather road network across the majority of the Council’s roads.
The cost to deliver this are in the order of $100 million to gravel the non-sealed road network (other
than minor roads) with ongoing maintenance costs of approximately $10 million per annum to maintain
gravel surfaces.
Both sealed and gravel roads have substantially shorter lifespans on black soil than on other base
materials. For example, gravel roads require re-sheeting every five years whereas sealed roads need to
be rebuilt approximately every 12 years. A means must be found whereby a proportion of the output
value of the Shire is able to be captured and reinvested in the ongoing maintenance of the road
network.
Council also struggles in terms of obtaining capital grants. The Benefit Cost ratio that is used in funding
applications is metro-centric and over-weights population served and total vehicle numbers. In practice,
light vehicles are irrelevant in terms of demands on the road network with heavy vehicles predominating
from both the design and operational perspective. As a result, grant programs are often out of touch
with the reality of rural roads meaning that a Council can miss out on critical funding needed to upgrade
necessary freight routes, give all weather access to business and families and emergency services or
provide a basic expected level of service to the community. For our area, if it does rain, it quite often
means that people cannot use their roads for business, education or personal use. This has significant
ramifications in terms of access to services, the ability to maintain off-farm jobs and access to education.
Health - to meet the local needs of indigenous and non-indigenous communities
While health is notionally a state responsibility, the reality is health funding is deeply dependent on
Commonwealth payments. There has been an increasing tendency over the last 20-30 years to
concentrate higher order medical services in a small number of key centres. As a result in many
communities primary health care services have reduced below an adequate level with ageing equipment
and understaffed services.
Again, to take the example of Moree Plains Shire, the Shire has experienced population decline over the
last 20 years. This has not resulted in a reduced demand for health services. Instead, as the population
ages, health demands have risen. Nevertheless health infrastructure in the Shire has not kept pace with
this increased demand. The Moree Hospital is old and lacks many of the services at a level needed to
minimise travel for health purposes.
PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 2 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

Shire residents regularly need to travel to Tamworth, Toowoomba, Newcastle and Sydney to access
higher order medical services. The nearest MRI facility is 3.5 hours’ drive away. This is despite Moree
township having a population of some 10,000 people. While some specialists visit the town on a
sessional basis, this is inadequate to handle other than basic health needs. Together with an ongoing
shortage of general practitioners the health system is coming under increasing stress. This is not only an
issue affecting the existing population but access to health services has been identified as a key element
in discouraging people, particularly professional people, from locating in rural and regional areas.
Population stability and/or growth can only be achieved when there are adequate base-level services to
meet community expectations.
Further incentives needs to be provided to health care professionals to further their careers in regional
Australia and to stay there as well. There are a range of initiatives being put in place such as the Dr
William Hunter Scholarship which aims to bring health professionals to rural areas by the students
completing their placement within the Moree Plains. The Federal and State Government need to provide
further support for these types of initiatives that are already functioning. These types of initiatives
translate into the education sector as well.
Indigenous health outcomes also require specific attention. One of the major benefits of enhanced
primary level health care in regional and remote communities is reducing the need for people to travel
“off country” to access healthcare. Not only are there significant financial barriers to travel, with the
remote area assistance scheme working on a “refund” basis, but people lose access to their social
support network particularly if they need to stay in other centres for extended periods of time.
Another issue is emergency services. An ambulance can be sent from a town that is either further away
than the closest hospital or from a location with inadequate services to deal with the emergency due to
a complete lack of local knowledge in a centralised call centre.
Education - to enhance life opportunities
Smaller communities are faced with an ever growing population gap as young families are forced to
move to larger locations to obtain better education and opportunities for their children. The cost of
boarding school is becoming prohibitive for many families and rural towns are dying because of it. If
there is to be a true commitment to provision of a level education playing field across Australia, country
schools need greater and genuine support in delivery such as shared services and expertise across a
region. The ability to deliver subjects remotely is critical to ensure the viability of schools into the future,
primarily in the high school sector. Funding for access to support services and resources for children with
disabilities, gifted and talented, and those for whom English is a second language is vitally important.
In the case of Moree, private sector education only goes to year 10. As a consequence, there is
significant demand for boarding school places including at Tamworth, Toowoomba and Sydney. This has
significant implications, in particular, the cost to households and accordingly the reduction in disposable
income available to support the town and its retail sector. Additional issues include social dislocation
which significantly affects family life.
Furthermore, the attraction of skilled workers is an issue across many professional industries impacted
by quality of life and education opportunities. Ensuring the rural community is an attractive place to live
and work for teachers is an essential step to enhance and maintain education opportunities by fostering
a sense of belonging so the teacher feels a connection with community and is motivated to stay.
The Country Universities Centre (CUC) model is an innovative approach to bringing universities to the
students rather than the students going to the universities. Council has been working closely with our
neighbours Narrabri Shire Council to implement a joint CUC for the Upper North-West Economic Region.
This model helps to ensure that those who wish to undertake tertiary education, but who many and
varied reasons are unable or unwilling to leave their community, are better supported in their efforts to
complete tertiary education. This model is particularly important for enhancing
PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 3 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

access to tertiary education for Indigenous people as it allows them to stay “on-country” and avoid the
costs of living in urban centres while continuing to experience the social and community support
networks that are available locally. Part of this program is being funded Federally and Council urges the
expansion of this program to cover a wider range of communities, in particular, communities below the
current “target size” of 15,000 people.
While education is notionally a state responsibility, there is increasing focus at the national level on
education both in terms of aspects such as the national curriculum but also in terms of funding models
associated with the Gonsky reforms. These reforms need to be further developed to address the issues
we have outlined.
A funding model which improves the economic viability of private sector education in towns such as
Moree would facilitate a balanced education sector covering both public and private education. In order
for the public sector not to be disadvantaged, additional support is required to ensure quality teachers
choose to locate in rural and regional areas and that resources are available including through the use of
technology to ensure wide subject choice.
Telecommunications - to facilitate primary industry growth and social and community development
While Moree township is being served by the NBN (generally fibre to the curb) the rest of the Shire is
dependent on SkyMuster. This is patently inadequate to serve the needs of the agribusiness sector as
well as meet the social and communication needs of the rural population and the population within
smaller villages. The massive shift to on-line service access further isolates rural people unless goodquality broadband communications are available. Council has made separate representation regarding
the universal service obligation that should be considered for rural and regional Australia.
In particular, it needs to be recognised that the Internet is not about downloading movies but is about
the effective use of “big data” to facilitate and enhance agricultural production, the ability to deliver
education to remote users, tele-medicine and the like. These services require full duplex Internet
capability rather than the current strong bias towards download speeds alone.
Similarly, plans need to be affordable. At the present time while 4G provides (in some locations)
appropriately high-speed services the data plans are far too limited to be effective. When 40 minutes of
drone flight produces 40GB of data which needs to be supplied to your local agronomist for analysis, the
limitations of the existing Internet services become very obvious.
Quality broadband Internet services can also extend the reach of the mobile phone network with
companies such as Optus and Telstra facilitating “voice over Wi-Fi”. In addition, there is still a need to
significantly expand the mobile phone network to provide continuous coverage on the national and
state highway network as well as coverage in smaller communities. Villages of 200 – 300 people are no
less important than communities that reach the magic 500 person threshold. Either the NBN needs a
complete re-think outside areas which can be served by fibre-optics or there needs to be a framework of
support for other providers through universal service obligation payment structures.
Inland Rail - to support productivity
This is the most significant infrastructure investment in Australia for many years only being matched by
the completion of the Adelaide – Darwin rail connection. It is critical that ongoing investment occur to
facilitate the full completion of the project, in particular, to achieve high quality connections to the Port
of Brisbane. While there is rail connection from Acacia Ridge to the Port, this is not adequate to achieve
the Inland Rail design specification.
Support also needs to be provided for complimentary infrastructure. To use the Moree case study, the
Inland Rail corridor will have significant severance effects on the town as it will operate on the existing
rail alignment. The current project design does not provide for appropriate
PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 4 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

corridor isolation to ensure safe operating conditions nor is the movement of grain to existing and
proposed Intermodal facilities accommodated. As rail volumes increase it will be necessary to construct
a full grade separated overpass to facilitate the movement of the bulk of the Shire’s grain products (in
the west of the Shire) to intermodal facilities on the eastern side of the Newell Highway/rail corridor.
A significant shortcoming of the project is that the overall analysis has failed to look at second-order
impacts of the construction both in terms of costs and opportunities. Council remains a very strong
supporter of the project, but is concerned that it will not realise its full value without attention to these
issues.
Air services - to ensure connectivity to urban areas
Air travel is a vital link to rural and regional communities. The move to deregulated routes in many states
has seen services to many smaller communities abandoned. In addition, the overall trend towards larger
service aircraft makes the economics of serving smaller communities increasingly challenging. Moree
experienced the collapse of an airline servicing the community with the economic damage occurring
from several weeks without services estimated at over $15 million.
Rural and regional communities require regular, affordable air services both to support the primary
production sector and to permit access to higher order services that are unavailable within the region.
Costs at the moment can be prohibitive. In a recent local case-study the need to travel at short notice to
Sydney by a patient and their carer cost over $2,600 in airfares before adding accommodation and travel
costs in Sydney.
Despite the remote area subsidy scheme overall costs still remain very high. In addition to creating a
regulatory environment that is conducive to the maintenance of air services, it is also important that
universal service obligations in terms of air travel be considered. This may involve route subsidies in
some cases. Where deregulation is being considered adoption of the Productivity Commission findings
into regional air services is critical. A current and major issue is that “slots” into the major capitals belong
to airlines not the communities. As a result without the ownership of these”slots” communities cannot
effectively negotiate with carriers.
Financial Assistance Grants – recognition of productivity instead of population
The theory behind the distribution of the Financial Assistance Grants is horizontal fiscal equalisation
whereby each recipient is required to make the same effort to raise revenue from its own sources and
operate at the same level of efficiency. As outlined earlier in this submission, the theory and the practice
are quite different. There is a need to translate horizontal fiscal equalisation into effective universal
service obligations around key aspects of quality of life. This involves both a review of the conditions of
the Grants as well as working with state and local government sectors to ensure or effective and
targeted distribution of funds to ensure equality of advantage.
The Moree Plains Shire has an area of 18,000km2 whereby travel times are up to 1.5 hours one way. It is
suggested that distribution of Financial Assistance Grants give additional weight to population dispersal
factors and also respond to intrinsic productivity. By more heavily weighting low population density and
including an explicit factor for overall agricultural productivity, the Grants more accurately reflect the
needs of communities as well as providing support for productivity. An over-emphasis on Census data
has several limitations. Firstly, Council is of the view that a measurable degree of undercounting occurs
amongst the Indigenous communities as well as in rural parts of the Shire. Secondly, downward trends in
population do not reflect an overall increase in agricultural productivity nor the increasing demand for
services associated with providing an adequate quality of life.

PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 5 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

The socio-economic gap in regional communities
Regional communities are often faced with a growing socio-economic gap within the communities
themselves. Major reductions in labour demand from the agricultural sector are leading to a widening
socio-economic gap that can contribute to increased crime and safety concerns. The police, the
Department of Family and Community Services and similar community agencies are not coping
effectively with these issues. While significant funds are being expended these are often not welltargeted and agencies are restricted by funding agreements and “tight” definitions of scope and
responsibility. This includes Federal agencies as well as state agencies.
There is a strong need for an integrated “connected up” approach to the delivery of social and
community services around the specific needs of individual communities and groups within those
communities rather than a “one size fits all” approach. Funding structures need to also reflect and
support local initiatives and genuinely empower local decision-making around solutions to local
problems. There needs to be more flexibility in what individual agencies can and can’t do as we struggle
to deal with the “gaps and overlaps” problems in social services.
The shift to outsourced competitive grant applications as a means of funding services has led to
competition between agencies, including not-for-profits rather than collaboration. This is unhealthy and
unproductive as it acts against long-term continuity of service provision when service providers may
chop and change with every short-term contract. Funding streams need to be secure well beyond a full
year of electoral cycle and also need to be strongly outcomes/evidence-based.
Intervention in remote communities has had a mixed history and has been a cause of major concern in
recent years. There are examples where intervention has been of significant positive benefit. The recent
implementation of the Australian Army Community Assistance Program at Toomelah near Goondiwindi
is a successful example whereby a strong relationship was built between the local Indigenous people and
the Army. This demonstrates that projects can be implemented in a sensitive and consultative manner
for the betterment of the community whilst improving their livelihoods through increased services.
Governance and Bureaucracy - threats due to government decisions
The overall approach to mining at the federal level is short sighted with short-term economic benefit
preferenced, while long term, and often unknown, environmental impacts accumulate. Even in the
short-term the lack of an effective mineral royalties framework has meant that the economic benefits of
mining have largely accrued to the shareholders of mining companies rather than to the broader
Australian community. Essentially, mineral resources are community assets and benefits from their use
need to be spread widely. A better environmental balance is badly needed. Our Artesian Basin must be
protected from coal seam gas and other similar industries. There are generational farmers here who
would lose their past and future should mining impact the groundwater. Notwithstanding the recent
Northern Territory enquiry, Council is still of the view that there is insufficient knowledge to undertake
fracking and similar activities in a long-term environmentally satisfactory manner. It is necessary from a
policy point of view to preference agriculture over mining as agriculture when properly managed is a
truly sustainable export opportunity for the country. Where mining does occur, royalties need to fully
reflect the “one-off” aspect of mining. Once the resource is gone, it is gone.
In addition, the impact of the Murray Darling Basin Plan has had significant impact on local jobs costing
our region millions in economic activity. Agriculture in our Shire directly employs 20% to 30% of the total
workforce, and in addition to many other industries, directly relies on the performance of the agriculture
sector for sustainability. The Northern Basin Review has clearly demonstrated the economic damage
including negative multiplier impacts of the water buybacks. The recent disallowance motion regarding
the return of additional waters to the Northern Basin risks further significant economic damage. Threats
to the agriculture sector of our Shire have ripple effects through the whole community and the Federal
Government should provide substantial additional support to local government in overcoming these
negative impacts.
PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 6 of 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 31

Again, the narrow focus of many grants programs does not provide local government with the flexibility
to address these local impacts in the most cost-effective manner.
In addition to these issues there is a general climate of rising bureaucracy, increasingly complex
legislation and significant overlap between Commonwealth and State responsibilities. The
Commonwealth environmental legislation and the lack of coordination with the NSW environmental
legislation is a current example that continues to cause ongoing problems for economic development. In
many cases species which are identified at the Commonwealth level as part of rare and endangered
groupings are in fact more widespread but there is simply a lack of scientific knowledge. Landholders are
increasingly needing to bear significant costs for what should be straightforward development within,
for example, existing industrially zoned land. Compensation mechanisms are in their infancy with any
effective “markets” for buying offset credits.
Council urges politicians and bureaucrats who make the policy and funding decisions to spend significant
time in the bush to see how obvious the different treatments of City areas and country regions are.
Regional Australia is becoming more and more like so-called “flyover” country in the USA with coastal
elites operating in a completely different economy to regional and remote areas. Only significant action
by the Federal Government to establish a more balanced approach to national development can address
these issues.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comments regarding regional inequality in Australia. If
you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me by phoning (
Yours Sincerely

Katrina Humphries
MAYOR

Lester Rodgers
GENERAL MANAGER

PO Box 420, Moree NSW 2400
Telephone (02) 6757 3222
Facsimile (02) 6752 3934
Page 7 of 7

