Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

The indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia
AUSTRALIAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION SUBMISSION TO THE SENATE
ECONOMICS REFERENCES COMMITTEE
30 April 2018
AUSTRALIAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION SUBMISSION TO THE SENATE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
2 February 2018

ABN 47 996 232 602
Level 3, 175 Pitt Street, Sydney NSW 2000
GPO Box 5218, Sydney NSW 2001
General enquiries 1300 369 711
Complaints info line 1300 656 419
TTY 1800 620 241

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

Table of Contents
1

Introduction .................................................................................................................. 2

2

Summary ....................................................................................................................... 2

3

Recommendation ......................................................................................................... 2

4

Australia’s human rights obligations ........................................................................ 3

5

Regional inequality and human rights ...................................................................... 5

6

Observations on human rights issues in regional, rural and remote locations... 7

6.1
National Human Rights Consultation .............................................................. 7
6.2
UN Human Rights System................................................................................... 8
6.3
Commission engagement with population groups ...................................... 9
(a)
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples ................................................ 9
(i)
Exacerbated discrimination ............................................................................ 9
(ii)
Participation in decision-making.................................................................. 10
(iii)
Close the Gap ................................................................................................ 11
(iv)
The Wiyi Yani U Thangani (Women’s Voices Project) ............................ 11
(b)
Women ................................................................................................................ 12
(c)
Children ............................................................................................................... 12
(d)
People with disabilities...................................................................................... 14
(i)
Disability supports ......................................................................................... 14
(ii)
Education ........................................................................................................ 15
(iii)
Transport......................................................................................................... 15
(iv)
National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) .......................................... 15
(v)
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people ............................................. 16
(e)
Older persons..................................................................................................... 16
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................. 19

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

1

Introduction

1.

The Australian Human Rights Commission (the Commission) welcomes the
opportunity to make this submission to the Senate Economic References
Committee (Committee) in its inquiry into regional inequality in Australia.

2.

The Commission has identified as a strategic priority that it ensure
engagement with regional, rural and remote communities in implementing its
work program. All of our Commissioners seek to do so through their projects
and activities.

2

Summary

3.

Australia is a party to seven core international human rights treaties.1 Under
these treaties, Australia owes obligations to respect, protect and promote the
full realisation of human rights in its territory. These obligations apply without
discrimination, and extend to people in rural, regional and remote Australia
equally.

4.

The Commission is concerned that geographical location can negatively affect
the ability of people to enjoy their rights and to have them realised. There are
many reasons for this, including lack of access to basic services in regional,
rural and remote locations. The Commission, through its work with population
groups such as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, women, persons
with disabilities, children and older persons, has observed numerous
instances where realisation of human rights has been frustrated by the impact
of regional inequality. Such observations also find support in public sentiment
expressed during the 2009 National Human Rights Consultation and in United
Nations engagement with human rights in Australia.

5.

The Commission considers that further information regarding human rights
issues in rural, regional and remote Australia is needed to better understand
the impact of regional inequality on human rights and to develop appropriate
policy responses to meet its obligations under international human rights law.
To this end, the Committee’s review presents an important opportunity to
identify negative impacts of regional inequality and to apply a human rights
framework in addressing them.

3

Recommendation
Recommendation: That the Committee apply a human rights framework
by asking the question: ‘Are Australian governments taking all
appropriate steps, to the maximum of available resources, to reduce
existing inequalities in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
rights in regional, rural and remote communities in Australia?
To address this question, the Committee should consider:


The extent to which disparities in enjoyment of rights for people in
regional, rural and remote locations compared to other Australians
is identified and acknowledged in policy and programs.
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

4
6.



The adequacy of data collection to identify disparities on an
ongoing basis.



The existence of targets and benchmarks to improve inequalities
over time, that are specific, time bound and verifiable.



Participatory engagement processes to involve affected
communities in the setting of priorities (given the limitation of
resources and the need to prioritise).



Whether such targets are sufficiently paced to achieve substantial
reductions in inequality in a reasonable timeframe, and crucially,
to also ensure that disparities are narrowing over time rather than
growing.

Australia’s human rights obligations
Australia is a party to seven core international human rights instruments.2
a)

International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
7.

Australia’s obligations under these treaties are threefold:




to respect — requiring government not to interfere with or
impermissibly limit human rights,
to protect — requiring government to take measures to prevent others
(for example individuals or corporations) from interfering with human
rights, and
to promote — requiring government to take positive measures to fully
realise human rights.3

8.

Where there has been a breach of human rights, Australia also has an
obligation to ensure that accessible and effective remedies are available. 4

9.

Human rights can be characterised in terms of civil and political rights and
economic, social and cultural rights.
i.

Civil and political rights include, for example, the right to equality before
the law; freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention; freedom from
arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence;
freedom of thought, conscience and religion; peaceful assembly; and
the right to vote.5
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

ii.

Social, economic and cultural rights include, for example, the right to an
adequate standard of living (which requires, at a minimum, adequate
food and nutrition, clothing, housing and necessary care and support
such as health and medical services), the right to work, the right to
social security and the right to take part in cultural rights.6

10.

Importantly, the nature of Australia’s obligations with respect to human rights
may differ on the basis of these characterisations.

11.

The UN Human Rights Committee has confirmed that a State party’s
obligation to give effect to civil and political rights is of ‘immediate effect’. 7 In
contrast, a State party’s obligation to fully realise economic, social and cultural
rights may be achieved ‘progressively’, rather than immediately. Article 2.1 of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)
requires States parties to:
take steps, individually and through international assistance and co-operation,
especially economic and technical, to the maximum of its available resources,
with a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights
recognized in the [ICESCR] (emphasis added).

12.

13.

However, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has noted
that States parties must immediately satisfy ‘minimum essential levels of each
of the rights’ in the ICESCR (or ‘minimum core obligations’). 8 It is only after the
minimum core obligation is satisfied that the less onerous obligation of
‘progressive realisation’ applies. Furthermore, if available resources are
inadequate, the Committee has clarified that the State party’s obligation
remains to ensure the widest possible enjoyment of economic, social and
cultural rights in the circumstances.9.
Human rights provide a framework for addressing inequality by
providing a system to guide policy-making and to influence the design,
delivery, monitoring and evaluation of programs and services. Crucially,
focusing on inequality through a rights perspective requires
governments to address issues of equal opportunity head on. The below
case study of the right to health illustrates how a rights framework can be
applied to issues of health inequality – such as experienced by a population
group (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples) or by some other status,
such as regional, rural and remote location.
Case study – the right to health
As an example, the right to health is set out in article 12 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. This recognises ‘the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health’.
It is not to be understood as a right to be healthy, which cannot be
guaranteed by governments. Instead, the right requires a state to ensure
that its population enjoys an equal opportunity to be as healthy as possible.
This includes by being able to access primary and other forms of health care
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

and medicines when necessary, as well as enjoying a high standard of
health infrastructure.
The right to health is subject to the over-arching principle of ‘progressive
realisation’. This means that governments must take steps that are
deliberate, concrete and targeted as clearly as possible towards health
equality and equality of opportunity in relation to primary health care and
health infrastructure.
Where health inequality and inequality of opportunity exists, governments
must identify appropriate health indicators with achievable benchmarks, so
that the rate of progress can be monitored and assessed. Setting
benchmarks enables governments and other parties to reach an agreement
about what rate of progress is adequate. Such benchmarks should be:


specific, time bound and verifiable;



set with the participation of the people whose rights are affected, to
agree on what is an adequate rate of progress and set realistic
targets; and



reassessed independently on their target date, with accountability for
performance.

14. For more information on Australia’s human rights obligations, please consult:

5

i.

‘Rights and freedoms: right by right’ at the Commission’s website,10

ii.

‘Guidance Sheets’ of the Attorney-General’s Department (Cth),11 and

iii.

the ‘Guide to Human Rights’ produced by the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights.12

Regional inequality and human rights

15.

The Commission is concerned that there are barriers to the realisation of
human rights for those living in rural, regional and remote Australia. There are
many reasons for this, including issues of distance and remoteness, higher
costs for service delivery, the extremes of weather and the uncertainties of the
rural economy.13 High population density in urban centres leads to greater
focus on services to those areas. This can result in inequalities in the provision
of goods, services and opportunities in rural, regional and remote areas.

16.

The Commission considers that the impacts of regional inequality can affect
many human rights in many different ways, as observed in section 6 below.
The impacts of regional inequality can affect:
i.

civil and political rights (such as through lack of access to police, courts
and legal protections, inadequate protection from violence, and lack of
availability of information, including through access to the internet and
digital economy), and
5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

ii.

17.

economic, social and cultural rights (such as through lower levels of
services for physical and mental health, education, housing and
employment).

Applying the human rights principles that apply to economic, social and
cultural rights, the pertinent question to ask is:
Are Australian governments taking all appropriate steps, to the
maximum of available resources, to reduce existing inequalities?

18.

The Commission considers that whether the Australian Government is
meeting its obligations to progressively realise improvements in regional
equality can be assessed by considering:


The extent to which disparities in enjoyment of rights for people in
regional, rural and remote locations compared to other Australians is
identified and acknowledged in policy and programs.



The adequacy of data collection to identify disparities on an ongoing
basis.



The existence of targets and benchmarks to improve inequalities over
time, that are specific, time bound and verifiable.



Participatory engagement processes to involve affected communities in
the setting of priorities (given the limitation of resources and the need to
prioritise).



Whether such targets are sufficiently paced to achieve substantial
reductions in inequality in a reasonable timeframe, and crucially, to also
ensure that disparities are narrowing over time rather than growing.

19.

The Commission notes that ‘persons living in remote areas are usually in a
disadvantaged situation’, compared to persons living in urban or densely
populated areas when it comes to enjoyment of basic services.14 It follows that
the Government must do more in those areas than in urban areas to fulfil its
human rights obligations.15

20.

The observations made in this submission have come to the Commission’s
attention in the course of carrying out its work. The Commission considers that
the Committee’s inquiry provides an important opportunity to identify negative
impacts of regional inequality and to apply a human rights framework in
addressing them. This will lead to a better understanding of the impact of
regional inequality on human rights and promote the development of targeted
policy responses to assist the Australian Government to fully realise (either
immediately or progressively, as appropriate) human rights and fulfil its
obligations under the international human rights treaties to which it is a
signatory.
Recommendation: That the Committee apply a human rights framework
by asking the question: ‘Are Australian governments taking all
appropriate steps, to the maximum of available resources, to reduce
6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

existing inequalities in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
rights in regional, rural and remote communities in Australia?
To address this question, the Committee should consider:

6



The extent to which disparities in enjoyment of rights for people in
regional, rural and remote locations compared to other Australians
is identified and acknowledged in policy and programs.



The adequacy of data collection to identify disparities on an
ongoing basis.



The existence of targets and benchmarks to improve inequalities
over time, that are specific, time bound and verifiable.



Participatory engagement processes to involve affected
communities in the setting of priorities (given the limitation of
resources and the need to prioritise).



Whether such targets are sufficiently paced to achieve substantial
reductions in inequality in a reasonable timeframe, and crucially,
to also ensure that disparities are narrowing over time rather than
growing.

Observations on human rights issues in regional, rural and
remote locations

21.

The balance of this submission provides observations made in the course of
the 2009 National Human Rights Consultation, Australia’s engagement with
the United Nations human rights system and the Commission’s strategic
human rights work, relating to regional inequality and human rights.

22.

The purpose of this section is to inform the Committee of particular concerns
that have previously been raised so as to guide its application of a human
rights approach to assessing the impacts of regional inequality in Australia.

6.1

National Human Rights Consultation

23.

In 2009, the Australian Government commissioned a detailed consultation
about human rights through the National Human Rights Consultation. The
consultation was the largest human rights inquiry in Australian history and was
conducted by an independent Committee led by Father Frank Brennan SJ.

24.

The deprivation of enjoyment of human rights in rural, regional and remote
Australia was one of many themes that arose in the consultation process. The
Committee released its report in September 2009 with recommendations.

25.

The Commission notes that, during the consultation roundtables, participants:

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

6.2

i.

considered that ‘in the case of health or other basic services, the gap
between metropolitan and rural and remote areas is a reality for many
who live outside our cities’,16

ii.

discussed poorer access to services in remote communities and the
differences in adequacy of services provided,17

iii.

complained about lack of health services in Mt Gambier and Whyalla,18

iv.

pointed out the irony that Mt Isa, a town that has contributed much to
Australia’s wealth, was ‘resource rich, service poor’,19

v.

noticed that amongst the most disadvantaged people living in rural and
remote areas are people with mental illness,20

vi.

discussed consequences of physical isolation – ‘[t]hey don’t call it the
Great Dividing Range for nothing; the Great Dividing Range is dividing
us from services’,21 and

vii.

considered there should be mechanisms for ensuring equality of
treatment across states and an enforceable right to equivalent
treatment.22

UN Human Rights System

26.

The relationship between regional inequality and human rights has been noted
at the international level through recommendations and concerns raised in the
context of Australia’s engagement with the United Nations human rights
system (including treaty bodies, members of the UN Human Rights Council via
the Universal Periodic Review process, and special rapporteurs).

27.

The Commission notes that UN human rights treaty bodies have called on
States parties to guarantee access to civil and political rights in remote areas
and, in relation to economic, social and cultural rights, have insisted on access
to certain minimum services.23

28.

The Commission draws particular attention to the following recommendations.
That Australia:
i.

increase accommodation and support services, especially in rural and
remote areas, with a view to reducing the risk of homelessness among
victims of domestic violence 24

ii.

collect data on the extent and depth of poverty, also disaggregated by
sex, indigenous peoples, age, urban/rural area and disability, and
provide such data in its next periodic report25

iii.

expand the outreach of social services to remote areas and refrain from
relocating indigenous peoples due to geographical considerations. 26

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

6.3

iv.

increase efforts to achieve the health targets outlined in the Closing the
Gap Strategy, and increasing generally investment in the health-care
services in remote areas27

v.

increase culturally appropriate early education programmes for
indigenous children in remote areas, noting the lack of such
programmes and that school attendance decreases with remoteness 28

vi.

continue with implementation of the National Plan to Reduce Violence
Against Women and their Children with a particular focus on support
services and resources available to women living in more remote areas,
and women from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds 29

vii.

take measures, in consultation with indigenous organisations and
communities, to develop housing strategies and increase and improve
the availability of remote, regional and urban housing.30

Commission engagement with population groups

29.

The Commission has observed, through its human rights work, the negative
affect of geographic location on the human right of particular population
groups, as discussed below.

30.

The Commission notes that the population groups discussed below are not an
exhaustive list of groups that have their human rights negatively affected by
the impacts of regional inequality. There are numerous groups unable to
access services in rural, regional and remote Australia, thereby frustrating
enjoyment of their human rights, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) peoples and migrant and culturally and linguistically
diverse communities, among others.

31.

The Commission also acknowledges there are many other significant issues
regarding equity to access to services beyond those raised in this submission.

(a)
32.

(i)
33.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples live in rural or regional
areas, and rely on regional centres for the delivery of essential services.31
Exacerbated discrimination
The Commission notes that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
affected by regional inequality may experience exacerbated discrimination.
This view is supported by concerns raised by UN treaty bodies and special
rapporteurs, namely that:
i.

remote Indigenous communities are patrolled by non-Indigenous law
enforcement officials, who are only integrated to a limited extent in the
communities they are intended to serve,32

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

ii.

Indigenous peoples living in remote areas face discrimination in access
to social security benefits, through the mandatory income-management
scheme and the community development program,33 and

iii.

in remote areas, employment is rare.34

34.

The Commission has found that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
living in regional and remote communities face particular issues impacting on
employment. In some locations the lack of jobs, poor health and high rates of
homelessness in the local community were raised as barriers to employment.35

35.

In relation to the experience of discrimination felt by Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples with disabilities in rural, regional and remote Australia,
the Commission draws attention to section 6.3(e) below.

(ii)

Participation in decision-making

36.

Indigenous peoples have the right to participate in decision-making in matters
which would affect their rights. Given the high numbers who live in regional
areas, it is important that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have
input in decision-making processes regarding government policies and
programs that affect them, including in regional areas. Without the
involvement of Indigenous peoples at the earliest stages of the development
of government programs and policies, the success of these initiatives,
including those designed to address human rights issues, as exacerbated by
regional inequality, can be crippled at the outset.36

37.

The right of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to participate in
decision-making is one of the key principles of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Declaration). The Declaration sets out
the minimum standards for the survival, dignity, well-being and rights of the
world’s Indigenous peoples.37 It contains more than 20 provisions that affirm
the right of indigenous peoples to participate in decision-making.38 This
includes articles 18 and 19, which set out the principle of participation in
decision-making, which is underpinned by a requirement of good faith and
free, prior and informed consent.39

38.

The Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples has noted:
indigenous participation in decision-making on the full spectrum of matters
that affect their lives forms the fundamental basis for the enjoyment of the full
range of human rights. This principle is a corollary of a myriad of universally
accepted human rights, and at its core enables indigenous peoples to be
freely in control of their own destinies in conditions of equality. Without this
foundational right, the human rights of indigenous peoples, both collective and
individual, cannot be fully enjoyed.40

39.

The articulation of the individual dimension of participation also exists in
international human rights treaties.41

40.

The Commission is concerned that mechanisms are not in place for
meaningful consultation with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples on
10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

issues that affect them and that this is especially so in rural, remote and
regional areas of Australia.
(iii)

Close the Gap

41.

The Commission recalls the issues surrounding access to health services in
regional areas. To that end, it notes the Close the Gap Campaign, which is
operated by peak Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Indigenous
health bodies, health professional bodies and human rights organisations.

42.

The Campaign’s goal is to raise the health and life expectancy of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people to that of the non-Indigenous population
within a generation: to close the gap by 2030. It aims to adopt a human rightsbased approach, as set out in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social
Justice Commissioner’s Social Justice Report 2005.42

43.

The Close the Gap Campaign’s 2018 report — A ten-year review: the Closing
the Gap Strategy and Recommendations for Reset — assesses the 2008
Council of Australian Governments’ (COAG) Closing the Gap Strategy, with its
target to achieve life expectancy (health) equality by 2030. It notes that
Australia has reached ‘a fork in the road’ for how it tackles the entrenched
inequalities and disparities in health and wellbeing for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples, including those who live in regional areas and makes
recommendations accordingly.

44.

The review also states that the social determinants of health inequality
(income, education, racism) must be addressed at a far more fundamental
level than before, including by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health
leadership, Primary Health Network and Federal agreements clarifying roles,
responsibilities and funding commitments at the regional level. 43

(iv)

The Wiyi Yani U Thangani (Women’s Voices Project)

45.

The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner and her
team are currently travelling around Australia to speak with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander women and girls about their needs, challenges and
aspirations for change. The name of this project — Wiyi Yani U Thangani —
means “women’s voices” in the Bunuba language and builds on the legacy of
the landmark 1986 Women’s Business Report. In addition to the community
meetings, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and girls can also
engage with the project through an online submission process. 44

46.

We know that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, girls and
communities are diverse. For this reason, the Wiyi Yani U Thangani project
intends to capture the distinct needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
women and girls who live in regional areas.

47.

The Commission hopes to ascertain further information on the issues that
regional inequality is having on the human rights of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander women and girls throughout this process. The Commission will
be able to provide information to the Committee on regional inequality as
11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

experienced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and girls in mid2019 when it releases its final report on the Wiyi Yani U Thangani project.
(b)

Women

48.

In 2011, over two-thirds (69%) of Australians lived in major cities, one in five
(20%) lived in inner regional areas, one in ten (9%) in outer regional areas and
around one in forty (2.3%) lived in remote or very remote areas (1.5% remote
and 0.8% very remote).45 One third of Australian women live in rural, regional
and remote areas. They play a crucial role in strengthening rural communities.

49.

In 2016, the Sex Discrimination Commissioner heard from Australian women
in consultations conducted across the country.46 The experiences of women
living in rural, regional and remote Australia highlighted that negative and
discriminatory gender-based stereotypes and attitudes are amplified for
women living in these communities.47 There was also a clear gender gap in
leadership, economic security and education; and higher rates of violence,
sexual harassment and sexism in rural, regional and remote areas.48

50.

The Australian Government’s Women’s Workforce Participation Strategy
identifies that rural, regional and remote women have a lower rate of
workforce participation compared to rural, regional and remote men (56.5%
and 66.8% respectively). The workforce participation rate of women in rural,
regional and remote areas is also lower that the national average of 59.2%. 49

51.

The Commission considers that there is currently an absence of a
comprehensive national picture of the experiences and human rights issues
facing women in rural, regional and remote areas, and more specifically, the
barriers to achieving economic security and empowerment. The Commission
is currently considering options to examine the barriers to economic security
faced by women in rural, regional and remote areas, to identify key themes
and opportunities for progress.

(c)

Children

52.

In 2012, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, in its concluding
observations on Australia, expressed concern about ‘health disparities of
children living in rural and remote areas’.50 The Committee recommended that
Australia ‘undertake all necessary measures to ensure that all children enjoy
the same access to and quality of health services’, with special attention to
children living in remote areas.51

53.

In 2013, the National Children’s Commissioner conducted a national listening
tour, known as the ‘Big Banter’, involving over 2,300 children and young
people and their advocates in cities, regional and remote areas across
Australia. Her consultations revealed that service delivery, access to new
technologies and infrastructure, and access to adequate healthcare, education
and housing varied significantly between cities, regional and remote areas.
She found that children and young people in regional and remote areas do not
enjoy the same opportunity to thrive as other children and young people.52

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

54.

Information provided to the National Children’s Commissioner’s 2014
examination of intentional self-harm, with or without suicidal intent showed that
children and young people who lived in remote areas were significantly more
likely to die due to intentional self-harm than by other external causes,
compared to children and young people who lived in metropolitan areas.53
Data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare indicated that
hospitalisations for intentional self-harm in children aged 3–17 years in
regional and remote areas accounted for 38% of all hospitalisations between
2007–2008 and 2012–2013.54

55.

According to Kids Helpline,55 in 2012–2013there was a significant increase in
the proportion of contacts from children and young people in rural centres and
areas who directly stated that self-injury and self-harm was their main
concern, from 27.12% in 2012 to 32.72% in 2013.56 Although the number of
contacts was small, there was also an increase in the proportion of contacts
from remote centres and areas, from 0.28% in 2012 to 1.07% in 2013. 57

56.

The Kids Helpline stated that in 2012–2013, 27.25% of contacts from children
and young people who directly stated that suicide was their main concern
were from rural centres and areas, and a further 1.26% from remote centres
and areas.58 Although the number of contacts was small, a significant increase
was seen in the proportion of contacts originating in remote centres and areas,
from 0.58% in 2012 to 1.92% in 2013.59

57.

Submissions to this examination further highlighted the lack of access to
information and available support services in rural and remote communities,
and noted that the services that do exist do not necessarily reflect the needs
or wants of these communities.60 According to Suicide Prevention Australia,
underemployment, lack of infrastructure, lack of health and education
services, restricted social and career opportunities, drought, and cultural
stoicism may contribute to the distress of young people in rural Australia. 61

58.

Other submissions made to the National Children’s Commissioner cited online
services as being integral to the health and wellbeing of children and young
people in regional and remote communities. Online services can connect
young people with professional help or provide them with information, skills,
support, intervention or referrals that can assist them to access help offline.62
The service ‘headspace’, for instance, stated that its eheadspace program
extends the reach of services to those young people who are unable or
unwilling to access office-based services, including particularly vulnerable
groups such as those in regional and remote communities.63

59.

Family and domestic violence also disproportionately affects children living in
regional and remote Australia. In 2014, the Productivity Commission reported
that, where families were seeking Specialist Homelessness Services resulting
from family and domestic violence, the proportion increased as remoteness
increased.64 The National Children’s Commissioner explored children’s
exposure to family and domestic violence in depth in 2015. As part of this
work, the Commissioner was advised that children in metropolitan areas were
more likely to have better access to services than those in rural and remote
areas.65
13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

60.

(d)
61.

Although the teenage birth rate in Australia is at an historic low, adolescents in
rural or remote locations experience teenage pregnancy more frequently.66
The National Children’s Commissioner focused on young parents and their
children in the 2017 report to Parliament. As part of this work, the
Commissioner learned that the teenage birth rate in remote or rural Australia
is more than four times that of the general population,67 with the most
vulnerable young parents living in rural or remote areas of Australia with
limited access to health and parenting services, education and employment
opportunities. The Healing Foundation advised that discussions about young
parenting in rural and remote areas do not take into account or prioritise the
cultural contexts of parenting.68
People with disabilities
The CRPD obliges the Australian Government to promote, protect, and ensure
the full enjoyment of human rights by persons with disabilities and ensure that
they have full equality under the law. Specifically, Article 9 promotes equality
of access for people with disability in both urban and rural areas:
Article 9 – Accessibility:
1. To enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate
fully in all aspects of life, States Parties shall take appropriate measures to
ensure to persons with disabilities access, on an equal basis with others, to
the physical environment, to transportation, to information and
communications, including information and communications technologies and
systems, and to other facilities and services open or provided to the public,
both in urban and in rural areas. 69

62.

(i)

Despite this obligation, people with disability in Australia still face significant
inequality, which is compounded when living in regional areas. Regional areas
are characterised by low population density and a lack of access to larger
service centres and transport routes. This can limit equity and access to
services. The more remote the location, the greater the inequality. 70
Disability supports

63.

People with disabilities in rural and remote areas of Australia have historically
faced considerable challenges to accessing quality disability supports and
services. People with disability and their carers report travelling long
distances, extensive waiting times and workforce shortages resulting in
difficulties accessing therapy and high levels of unmet need.71 Physiotherapy,
occupational therapy, speech pathology, and early intervention services are
examples of services that are not readily available in regional and remote
areas, yet these play an important role in supporting people with disability to
participate in society on an equal basis with others. This lack of support is
particularly exacerbated for children living in rural areas; 32% of children living
in rural or remote NSW are unable to access the health services they need.72

64.

The lack of services in regional areas not only restricts choice, but sometimes
results in people with disability being forced to leave their communities in
order to access specialist disability services and support.73 According to a
study by the University of Sydney, rural families in Western NSW that have a
14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

child with a disability often face the difficult decision about whether to stay in
their communities or move to a larger metropolitan centre to improve their
access to, and choice of, support services.74
(ii)
65.

Education
The lack of services for people with disability in rural areas is not limited to
specialist disability supports. People with disability in rural areas also face
difficulties in finding inclusive mainstream services. The Disability
Discrimination Commissioner’s national consultations held in 2016–2017
highlight the ongoing challenges people with disability have accessing
mainstream services, including education:
Sophie has Down syndrome and trauma from past medical operations and
experiences. She lived on an isolated rural property in NSW.
The local high school informed Sophie’s mum that they were establishing
specialist support classes and, if Sophie chose to go to school there, she
would have to be in one of these classes. During primary school, Sophie
enjoyed an inclusive education, participating in classes with other students
and receiving support from a teacher’s aide to assist her to build her
literacy and numeracy skills.
Sophie’s parents decided to move to a regional coastal town to give
Sophie better opportunities and an inclusive education. They chose a new
school that they thought would offer Sophie an inclusive education.
However, after a few months, the school advised they would be starting a
specialist support class and Sophie would be placed in this class.
Sophie’s mum did not want her to move to the specialist support class, and
is currently looking for other schools, but is finding that all of the Principals
she has met have very low expectations of Sophie and her ability to
succeed at school. Sophie’s family have already moved once to try to offer
her better educational opportunities, but now it looks like they will have to
move again until they find a school that will offer her an inclusive
education.75

(iii)
66.

(iv)
67.

Transport
The difficulties confronting people with disabilities in accessing transport are
significant in rural and regional areas. The Commission is particularly
concerned about reports that a lack of accessible transport is creating and
increasing social isolation felt by some people with disability in regional
communities. People with disability in regional South Australia have reported
being stuck at home, missing family events and suffering weeks of isolation
due to limited accessible transport.76 A lack of accessible transport can
severely limit the independence and quality of life for people living in regional
areas, and is critical to counter social isolation in regional communities.
National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
The NDIS could transform the way services are funded and delivered in
regional areas, enabling people with disability to be better supported and have
greater choice and control to live independently in the community.

15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

68.

(v)

However, the transformation to a market-driven system presents both
opportunities and challenges for people with disability, support providers and
Governments. This is a particular concern in regional areas where there are
‘thin’ markets (areas with very few providers and limited demand). 77 To be
effective in rural and remote Australia, the NDIS will need to be designed,
funded and operated to meet the specific requirements of people in regional
areas. This includes consideration of distance, isolation, higher cost of service
provision and workforce shortages. Seeking and listening to the views of
people with disability in regional areas will be critical to ensure the scheme
meets the ongoing needs of people with disability in these communities.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people

69.

The negative experience of many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
with disabilities living in regional and remote Australia is particularly acute.
Many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with disabilities experience
discrimination regularly in terms of access to premises and to transport.78

70.

The lack of accessible transport has a significant impact on Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people with disability, particularly physical disability, in
regional and remote areas. This lack of access affects their ability to access
education, employment and, critically, health services.79

71.

There is a significant lack of accessible housing stock in regional and remote
Australia. The Commission is concerned that some major housing initiatives
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have not met accessibility
standards and have not been developed in consultation with experts in
accessible design.80

(e)

Older persons

72.

The Commission’s Willing to Work inquiry (2016)81 found that too many people
are shut out of work because of underlying assumptions, stereotypes or myths
associated with their age. These beliefs lead to discriminatory behaviours
during recruitment, in the workplace and in decisions about training, promotion
and retirement, voluntary and involuntary. The cost and impact of this is high,
for individuals and for our economy. People who are willing to work but are
denied the opportunity are denied the personal and social benefits that work
brings—dignity, independence, sense of purpose and social connectedness.

73.

The Inquiry conducted 120 consultations with 1,175 individuals in over 20
locations around Australia, including regional, rural and remote areas. The
Inquiry chose areas by researching population demographics, industry and
economic profiles, with the aim of selecting places that are distinct from one
another to ensure there was a mix of different types.82

74.

The Commission refers the Committee to the report for general findings and
recommendations about age discrimination and older workers in Australia.83

75.

The Inquiry heard from older people in regional and remote areas about the
barriers they face in gaining employment. One concern raised was that
16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

workers in regional and remote locations have fewer options in terms of
employment:
Everyone is scared to go against the mining company because they are the heart
of this town. I was very loyal to the company and stayed in [here]. [The way they
treated me] was an insult.84

76.

The Inquiry also heard that employers in some regional locations do not need
to provide flexibility as they have a ‘large pool of potential workers so when
they face issues with older people they just let people go’. A related issue
raised with the Inquiry was the oversupply of workers in some areas.85

77.

The Inquiry found that the problems of being stereotyped on the basis of age
could be exacerbated in regional areas. As one person told the Inquiry:
I live in a very small inland rural catchment area … and everyone here knows you,
how old your children are and how old you are. After unsuccessfully applying for
more than 50 positions in the last 18 months, I submitted an application for a
position I am more than qualified to fill but under a fake name. When I was
contacted to attend an interview I declined citing personal reasons ... Ironically I
had recently submitted several applications to this organisation for similar jobs
and not been shortlisted.86

78.

One core issue is that of regional older workers displaced through industry
restructuring, as there may not be a wide range of alternative local employers
needing their current skills. The Inquiry report cited NCVER research that
suggested these workers are best assisted through the following practices:87
i.

Early intervention that occurs well before the workers reach their
retrenchment dates, with ongoing mentoring after retrenchment.

ii.

Holistic programs that are tailored to the backgrounds and
requirements of the individual worker.

iii.

Regional job-creation initiatives to assist workers to find new local jobs.

iv.

Offer upfront screening prior to the commencement of any training to
ensure that the program is appropriate for the individual.

v.

Design age-inclusive training that is highly experiential, practical and
fills gaps in existing knowledge and skills, identified through upfront
skills recognition.

vi.

Provide foundational skills training including core literacy and numeracy
skills, employability skills and digital literacy.

vii.

Provide accelerated training where possible to support older workers
into work quickly.

viii.

Include tailored job search and self-promotion services after training.

ix.

Seek effective partnering between training providers, employers and
industry groups.88
17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

x.
79.

Many of these broad practices are useful general strategies for
encouraging older workers into the workforce.

The Commission also assisted with the development of The Regional
Australia Institute report, Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth.89 Key findings from that report include:


There is significant variation in the demographics and experiences of
older workforces between regions. This is particularly apparent in
participation rates of older workers and in the breakdown between
fulltime and part-time work.90



Flexible work availability (such as part-time work) is important to older
workers and needs to be fostered in some regions to allow continued
engagement by older people.91



Training is key to increasing older workforce participation, including
dedicated retraining, job matching programs and access to recognition
of Prior Learning accreditation.92



Government policies need to be examined in the light of the need to
encourage longer working lives, in areas including the Restart program,
the Work Bonus Scheme, superannuation policies and income
protection insurance age limits.93

80.

Labour force participation rates for older people in many regional areas remain
far too low. Without deliberate and concerted action, participation rates,
though increasing slowly, will not increase fast enough to address the human
rights and national economy deficits caused by this discrimination.

81.

The Commission also observes that access to government services
increasingly requires interaction with and access to information technology.
This can have a disproportionate impact on older persons and persons with
disabilities, which is exacerbated in rural, remote and regional locations where
internet may be inaccessible, slow, and expensive. Technological support, in
terms of training to use technology and support for troubleshooting, may also
be less accessible in such areas.

82.

To the extent that government services can be accessed in person, this will
typically require older persons and persons with disabilities to be mobile. In
regional, rural and remote Australia, mobility poses a greater challenge given
the distance involved in attending an appointment at a government service
agency in a city and adequate transport options may be limited.

83.

Older persons and persons with disabilities are vulnerable. Abuse is more
likely to happen when an individual is isolated, which may be more common in
rural areas. Yet access to community legal centres and other services are not
as accessible in rural and remote areas as they are in the cities.

84.

There are many possible responses that could be explored to grapple with
such issues. For example, a special phone number for older persons and
persons with disabilities may be of assistance in facilitating access to key
18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

services, such as Centrelink and My Aged Care. Provision of soundproof
cubicles in local libraries and community centres with access to Skype may
enable them to make virtual face-to-face meetings with relevant service
providers.
85.

The Commission encourages the Committee to explore options to address
such issues in carrying out its inquiry and to make relevant recommendations
in its report.

Endnotes

19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

1

Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011 (Cth), ss 3, 8, 9. At
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Det ails/C2011A 00186 (viewed 11 September 2017).
2 Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011 (Cth), ss 3, 8, 9. At
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Det ails/C2011A 00186 (viewed 11 September 2017).
3 ICCPR, art 2, Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 31: The Nature of the General Legal
Obligation Imposed on States Parties to the Covenant, 29 March 2004, [6]–[7]. See also, generally,
Adam McBeth, Justine Nolan & Simon Rice, The International Law of Human Rights (Oxford
University Press, 2011), 112–114.
4 ICCPR, art 2(3). See also, generally, Adam McBeth, Justine Nolan & Simon Rice, The International
Law of Human Rights (Oxford University Press, 2011), 114, 150–151.
5 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , opened for signature 16 December
1966, 993 UNTS 3 (entered into force 3 January 1976).
6 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , opened for signature 16 December
1966, 993 UNTS 3 (entered into force 3 January 1976).
7 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 31: The Nature of the General Legal Obligation
Imposed on States Parties to the Covenant, 29 March 2014, [14].
8 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment 3: The Nature of states
Parties Obligations, UN ESCOR, 5th sess, UN Doc E/1991/23 (14 December 1990) [10].
9 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, An Evaluation of the Obligation to Tak e
Steps to the ‘Maximum of Available Resources’ under an Optional Protocol to the Covenant , UN
ESCOR, 38th sess, UN Doc E/C.12/2007/1 (10 May 2007) [3].
10 Australian Human Rights Commission, Rights and freedoms: right by right. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/rights-and-freedoms-right-right-0 (viewed 17 April 2018).
11 Attorney-General’s Department, Public sector guidance sheets. At
https://www.ag.gov.au/RightsAndP rotections/HumanRights/Human -rightsscrutiny/PublicSectorGuidanceSheets/Pages/default.aspx (viewed 17 April 2018).
12 Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Guide to Human Rights (June 2015) Parliament
of Australia. At
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliament ary_Business/Committees/Joint/Human_Rights/Guidance_Notes_a
nd_Resources (viewed 17 April 2018).
13 Australian Human Rights Commission, The human rights of rural Australians (Occasional Paper,
May 1996). At https://www.humanrights.gov.au/publications/human -rights-rural-australians (viewed 16
April 2018).
14 Antal Berkes, ‘“Remote Areas” in International Human Rights Law’ (2014), 47 Rev. BDI 528 (2014),
528.
15 Antal Berkes, ‘”Remote Areas” in International Human Rights Law’ (2014), 47 Rev. BDI 528 (2014),
542.
16 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 15.
17 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 32.
18 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 32.
19 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 32.
20 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 33.
21 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 32.
22 National Human Rights Consultation Committee, National Report (2009), 32.
23 Antal Berkes, ‘”Remote Areas” in International Human Rights Law’ (2014), 47 Rev. BDI 528 (2014),
537–538.
24 United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding observations on
the combined fifth periodic report of Australia, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (23 June 2017) para 34. At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fA US
%2fCO%2f5&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018).
25 United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding observations on
the combined fifth periodic report of Australia, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (23 June 2017) para 40. At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fA US
%2fCO%2f5&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018).
26 United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding observations on
the combined fifth periodic report of Australia, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (23 June 2017) para 41(d)–
(e). At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fA US
%2fCO%2f5&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018).
20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

27

United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding observations on
the combined fifth periodic report of Australia, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (23 June 2017) para 44. At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fA US
%2fCO%2f5&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018). See also Report of the Work ing Group on the Universal
Periodic Review Australia, HRC, 31st sess, Agenda Item 6, UN Doc A/HRC/31/14 (13 January 2016),
24 [136.210] (Portugal). At http:// www.ohchr.org/EN/HRB odies/UPR/Pages/AUSession23.aspx
(viewed 16 April 2018).
28 United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding observations on
the combined fifth periodic report of Australia, UN Doc E/C.12/AUS/CO/5 (23 June 2017) para 51–52.
At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fA US
%2fCO%2f5&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018). See also Report of the Work ing Group on the Universal
Periodic Review Australia, HRC, 31st sess, Agenda Item 6, UN Doc A/HRC/31/14 (13 January 2016),
24 [136.211] (Moldova). At http:// www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UP R/Pages/AUSession23.aspx
(viewed 16 April 2018). See also Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights
of indigenous peoples on her visit to Australia, UN Doc A/HRC/36/46/Add.2 (8 August 2017) 10 [54]–
[56]. At http://ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=A/HRC/36/46/Add.2 (viewed 16 April 2018).
29 Report of the Work ing Group on the Universal Periodic Review Australia, HRC, 31st sess, Agenda
Item 6, UN Doc A/HRC/31/14 (13 January 2016), 21 [136.161] (Croatia). At http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UP R/Pages/AUSession23.aspx (viewed 16 April 2018).
30 Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples on her
visit to Australia, UN Doc A/HRC/36/46/Add.2 (8 August 2017) 20 [112(a)]. At
http://ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=A/HRC/36/46/Add.2 (viewed 16 April 2018).
31 In the 2016 Census, only just over one-third (35 per cent) of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander population lived in capital city areas. States with relatively high proportions of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people living in capital cities include South Australia (54 per cent) and Victoria
(50 per cent). By contrast, in the Northern Territory, 78 per cent of the population who identified as
being of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander origin lived outside the capital city area. In
Queensland, 71 per cent of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population lived outside of the
capital city area. See 2016 Census Counts - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People (31 August
2017) Australian Bureau of Statistics. At
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lat estproducts/2075. 0Main%20Features52016?opendocum
ent&tabname=Summary&prodno=2075.0&issue=2016&num=& view (viewed 22 March 2018).
32 Mutuma Ruteere, Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance on his mission to Australia, UN Doc
A/HRC/35/41/Add.2 (9 June 2017) 14 [52]. At
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularS essions/Session35/ Documents/A_HRC_35_41_Ad
d_2_EN.docx (viewed 16 April 2018)
33 United Nations Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding observations on the
eighteenth to twentieth periodic reports of Australia, UN Doc CERD/C/AUS/CO/18-20 (26 December
2017) para 23–24. At
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno= CERD%2fC%2fAUS
%2fCO%2f18-20&Lang=en (viewed 16 April 2018).
34 Mutuma Ruteere, Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance on his mission to Australia, UN Doc
A/HRC/35/41/Add.2 (9 June 2017) 12–13 [48]. At
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularS essions/Session35/ Documents/A_HRC_35_41_Ad
d_2_EN.docx (viewed 16 April 2018).
35 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 185.
36 James Anaya, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms of indigenous people, Human Rights Council Twelfth session, Agenda item 3 , UN Doc
A/HRC/12/34 (15 July 2009), para 36.
37 United Nations General Assembly, United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples ,
A/RES/61/295 (adopted by the General Assembly 2 October 2007).
38 Report of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Progress report on the study
on indigenous peoples and the right to participate in decision-mak ing, Human Rights Council
Fifteenth session, Agenda Item 5, UN Doc A/HRC/15/35 (23 August 2010) para 8.
Report of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Progress report on the study on
indigenous peoples and the right to participate in decision-mak ing, Human Rights Council
Fifteenth session, Agenda Item 5, UN Doc A/HRC/15/35 (23 August 2010) para 5.
21

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

40

Report of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Progress report on the study
on indigenous peoples and the right to participate in decision-mak ing, Human Rights Council
Fifteenth session, Agenda Item 5, UN Doc A/HRC/15/35 (23 August 2010) para 2.
41 See, eg, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171 (entered into force 23 March 1976) art 25; Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, opened for signature 18 December 1979, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3 August 1981) arts 7 and 8; and Convention on the Rights of the Child, opened for
signature 20 November 1989, 1577 UNTS 3 (entered into force 2 September 1990) art 26 art 12.
42 Tom Calma, Social Justice Report 2005, Australian Human Rights Commission
43 Chris Holland, ‘A ten-year review: the Closing the Gap Strategy and Recommendations for Reset’,
(2018) Close the Gap Campaign Steering Committee for indigenous Health Equality, 7
(recommendation 5).
44 The Project, Wiyi Yani U Thangani. At https://wiyiyaniuthangani.humanrights.gov.au/wiyi-yani-uthangani-womens-voices/project (viewed 22 March 2018).
45 Australian Institute of Family Studies (Jennifer Baxter, Matthew Gray and Alan Hayes), Families in
regional, rural and remote Australia (2011). At: https://aifs.gov.au/publications/families-regional-ruraland-remote-australia
46 Australian Human Rights Commission, A conversation in gender equality, March 2017. At:
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/sex-discrimination/projects/conversation-gender-equality2017 (viewed 13 September 2017).
47 Australian Human Rights Commission, A conversation in gender equality, March 2017, 18. At:
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/sex-discrimination/projects/conversation-gender-equality2017 (viewed 13 September 2017).
48 Australian Human Rights Commission, A conversation in gender equality, March 2017, 18. At:
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/sex-discrimination/projects/conversation-gender-equality2017 (viewed 13 September 2017).
49 Australian Government, Towards 2025: An Australian Government Strategy to Boost Women’s
Work force Participation, Implementation Plan 2017-18, 36. At:
http://womensworkforceparticipation.pmc.gov.au/
50 Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of
the Child: Australia, 60th sess, UN Doc CRC/C/AUS/CO/4 (28 August 2012) [59]
51 Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of
the Child: Australia, 60th sess, UN Doc CRC/C/AUS/CO/4 (28 August 2012) [60]
52 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2013), 94. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2013
(viewed 9 March 2018).
53 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 108. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 9 March 2018).
54 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 133. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 9 March 2018).
55 Kids Helpline offers counselling support for children and young people aged 5 to 25 years who
contact the service via telephone, email and a real-time web platform. Kids Helpline gathers
information on a range of issues directly stated by children and young people who contact the service,
including on self-injury, self-harm and suicide: BoysTown (Kids Helpline), Submission No 116 to the
National Children’s Commissioner, Inquiry into Intentional Self-harm and Suicidal Behaviour in
Children, 2 June 2014, 3. At http://www.humanrights.gov.au/submissions-intentional-self-harm-andsuicidal-behaviour-children (viewed 14 March 2018).
56 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 147. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 14 March 2018); BoysTown (Kids Helpline), Submission No 116 to the National Children’s
Commissioner, Inquiry into Intentional Self-harm and Suicidal Behaviour in Children, 2 June 2014, 14.
At http://www.humanrights.gov.au/submissions-int entional-self-harm-and-suicidal-behaviour-children
(viewed 14 March 2018).
57 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 147. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 14 March 2018); BoysTown (Kids Helpline), Submission No 116 to the National Children’s
Commissioner, Inquiry into Intentional Self-harm and Suicidal Behaviour in Children, 2 June 2014, 14.
At http://www.humanrights.gov.au/submissions-int entional-self-harm-and-suicidal-behaviour-children
(viewed 14 March 2018).
22

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 141. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 14 March 2018); BoysTown (Kids Helpline), Submission No 116 to the National Children’s
Commissioner, Inquiry into Intentional Self-harm and Suicidal Behaviour in Children, 2 June 2014, 12.
At http://www.humanrights.gov.au/submissions-int entional-self-harm-and-suicidal-behaviour-children
(viewed 14 March 2018).
59 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 141. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 14 March 2018); BoysTown (Kids Helpline), Submission No 116 to the National Children’s
Commissioner, Inquiry into Intentional Self-harm and Suicidal Behaviour in Children, 2 June 2014, 12.
At http://www.humanrights.gov.au/submissions-int entional-self-harm-and-suicidal-behaviour-children
(viewed 14 March 2018).
60 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2014), 108-109. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2014
(viewed 9 March 2018).
61 Suicide Prevention Australia, Position statement: Youth suicide prevention (2010). At
https://www.suicidepreventionaust.org/sites/default/files/resources/2016/SPA -Youth-SuicidePrevention-Position-Statement%5B 1%5D. pdf (viewed 9 March 2018).
62 Dr Mareka Frost, Submission 72, p 5. At https://www.humanrights.gov.au/ our-work/childrens rights/publications/childrens-rights-report-2014 (viewed 9 March 2018).
63 headspace, Submission 89, p 14-15. At https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrensrights/publications/childrens-rights-report-2014 (viewed 9 March 2018).
64 Productivity Commission, Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage - Key Indicators 2014 (2014) 95.
65 Australian Human Rights Commission, Children’s Rights Report (2015), 134. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/childrens-rights/publications/childrens-rights-report -2015
(viewed 11 March 2018).
66 Jennifer Marino, Lucy Lewis, Deborah Bateson, Martha Hickey and Rachel Skinner, ‘Teenage
Mothers’ (2016) 45(10) Australian Family Physician 712, 712; Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare, ‘A Picture of Australia’s Children 2012’ (Report, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
2012) 51-52.
67 Jennifer Marino, Lucy Lewis, Deborah Bateson, Martha Hickey and Rachel Skinner, ‘Teenage
Mothers’ (2016) 45(10) Australian Family Physician 712, 712; Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Births,
Australia, 2015’, ABS Catalogue No 3301.0 (7 February 2017). At
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/ 3301.0 (viewed 9 March 2018).
68 Roundtable Discussion, National Children’s Commissioner’s Investigation into Young Parents and
their Children (2017).
69 United Nations General Assembly. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. (2007). At
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-t he-rights-of-persons-withdisabilities/convention-on-t he-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities-2.html (viewed 19 March 2018).
70 Department of Social Services. National Disability Strategy Second Implementation Plan: Driving
Action 2015-2018. (2015). https://www.dss.gov.au/disability-and-carers/programsservices/government -international/national-dis ability-strategy -second-implementation-plan (viewed 19
March 2018).
71 Johnson, Ed. Victims of circumstance: Disability services in rural and remote areas. (2016). At
https://aifs.gov.au/cfca/2016/10/05/ victims-circumstance-disability-services-rural-and-remote-areas
(viewed 19 March 2018).
72 Royal Far West. The Invisible Children: The state of country children’s health and development in
Australia (2017). http://www.royalfarwest.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/ Invisible -childrenweb.pdf (viewed 21 March 2018).
73 National People with Disabilities and Carer Council. SHUT OUT: The Experience of People with
Disabilities and their Families in Australia. (2016). https://www.dss.gov.au/ourresponsibilities/disability-and-carers/publications-articles/policy-researc h/shut-out-the-experience-ofpeople-with-disabilities-and-their-families-in-australia (viewed 19 March 2018).
74 Angela Dew, Vicki Happ, Kim Bulkeley, Anita Bundy, Michelle Lincoln, Gisselle Gallego, Jennie
Brentnall & Craig Veitch. (2014). ‘Rural Carers of People with Disabilities: Making Choices to Move or
to Stay’, Research and Practice in Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities , 1:1, 60-70, (viewed 19
March 2018).
58

75

Australian Human Rights Commission. Stories from Shaping our future: Discussions on disability
rights. (2017). At https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/disability-rights/projects/shaping-ourfuture-discussions-disability-rights (viewed 19 March 2018).

23

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 33

Australian Human Rights Commission
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia , Senate Inquiry — 30 April 2018

76

Hanifie, Sowaibah. People with disabilities suffering isolation due to lack of transport in regional
South Australia. (2018). At http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-03-10/regional-sa-people-withdisabilities-call-for-transport -support/9527042 (viewed 19 March 2018).
77

National Disability Insurance Agency. Rural and Remote Strategy 2016-2019. (2016).
https://www.ndis.gov.au/Rural -and-Remote-Strategy (viewed 19 March 2018).
78 First Peoples Disability Network, Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Community
Affairs inquiry into Delivery of Outcomes under the National Disability Strategy 2010-2929 to build
inclusive and accessible communities (2017). At http://fpdn.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2017/05/Senate-Standing-Committee-on-Community-Affairs-Inquiry-into-Delivery-ofOutcomes-under-the-National-Disability-Strat egy-2010-2020-to-build-inclusive-and-accessiblecommunities.pdf (viewed 28 June 2017).
79 First Peoples Disability Network, Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Community
Affairs inquiry into Delivery of Outcomes under the National Disability Strategy 2010-2929 to build
inclusive and accessible communities (2017). At http://fpdn.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2017/05/Senate-Standing-Committee-on-Community-Affairs-Inquiry-into-Delivery-ofOutcomes-under-the-National-Disability-Strat egy-2010-2020-to-build-inclusive-and-accessiblecommunities.pdf (viewed 28 June 2017).
80 First Peoples Disability Network, Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Community
Affairs inquiry into Delivery of Outcomes under the National Disability Strategy 2010-2929 to build
inclusive and accessible communities (2017). At http://fpdn.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2017/05/Senate-Standing-Committee-on-Community-Affairs-Inquiry-into-Delivery-ofOutcomes-under-the-National-Disability-Strat egy-2010-2020-to-build-inclusive-and-accessiblecommunities.pdf (viewed 28 June 2017).
81 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016.
82 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 27.
83 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016. At
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/age-discrimination/projects/willing-work-national-inquiryemployment-discrimination-against (viewed 27 March 2018).
84 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 74.
85 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 74.
86 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 63.
87 Australian Human Rights Commission, Willing to Work National Inquiry into Employment
Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability, 2016, 113.
88 F Ferrier, G Burke and C Smith, Skills development for a diverse older workforce (NCVER, 2008), 7.
89 K Houghton and B Vonthethoff (2017) Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth, The Regional Australia Institute.
90 K Houghton and B Vonthethoff (2017) Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth, The Regional Australia Institute, 9.
91 K Houghton and B Vonthethoff (2017) Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth, The Regional Australia Institute, 11.
92 K Houghton and B Vonthethoff (2017) Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth, The Regional Australia Institute, 17.
93 K Houghton and B Vonthethoff (2017) Ageing and work in regional Australia: Pathways for
accelerating economic growth, The Regional Australia Institute, 18.

24

