Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

30 April 2018

Committee Secretary
Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
By email: <Economics.Sen@aph.gov.au>

Dear Mr Fitt
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
I refer to the above inquiry, and provide a submission to the Senate Economics References Committee (the
Committee) on behalf of the Institute of Public Affairs (IPA). I thank the Committee for the invitation to
provide a submission on this topic.
The role of policymakers should be to maximise opportunity, not to deliver equality of outcome. The
following submission emphasises measures of economic inequality. Australia’s cities are economically
stronger than regions, as one would expect in a modern services-driven economy. To the extent that
regional inequality is caused by structural economic factors and individual choices, policymakers should not
prevent unequal outcomes. Nevertheless, policy makers should (1) address issues that are limiting
opportunity such as high taxes, red tape, and welfare dependency, and (2) take steps to decentralise
political power to local communities to combat the century-long centralising of power in cities and
Canberra.
About the Institute of Public Affairs
The IPA is an independent, non-profit public policy think tank, dedicated to preserving and strengthening
the foundations of economic and political freedom. The IPA supports the free market of ideas, the free flow
of capital, a limited and efficient government, evidence-based public policy, the rule of law, and
representative democracy. Throughout human history, these ideas have proven themselves to be the most
dynamic, liberating and exciting. Our researchers apply these ideas to the public policy questions which
matter today.
Response to the Committee’s inquiry
1. The role of policymakers should be to maximise opportunity, not to achieve equal outcomes
The Committee has stated that it would like to hear about ‘unequal access to opportunities and unequal
outcomes’. Maximising access to opportunity is a welcome and admirable goal. Equal outcomes, however,
is not a legitimate public policy objective. Unequal outcomes are necessary to motivate humans to work
hard and pursue innovation that ultimately benefits everyone. A perfectly equal society is a universally poor
society. Relative success which is achieved by working hard and providing value to society should be
encouraged and celebrated.
Institute of Public Affairs, Level 2, 410 Collins Street,
Melbourne Victoria 3000 T: (03) 9600 4744 F: (03) 9602 4989
www.ipa.org.au

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

There is limited evidence of growing inequality in Australia. The IPA’s Daniel Wild and Andrew Bushnell
have concluded that income inequality in Australia is both low by international standards and, if anything,
declining.1 Australia’s Gini coefficient, the most common measure of inequality, is slightly lower than it was
15 years ago and at about the average of comparable nations. The Grattan Institute has found that
Australia’s regions are growing just as fast as our cities.2
Nevertheless, as Wild and Bushnell discuss, many Australians lack opportunity. No matter whether a person
lives in Sale or Sydney, Mackay or Melbourne, or Bathurst or Brisbane, certain activities, ‘life paths’ and
access to certain institutions deliver better life outcomes. The key indicators of opportunity and
determiners of success are: work, education, marriage, family, entrepreneurship, affordable energy, home
ownership, volunteering, and self-sufficiency.3 Not all Australians have equal access to these successful
paths and institutions. This is due to a mixture of individual choice, culture, and public policy.
The idea of ‘life paths’ was summed up by Amy Wax and Larry Alexander, Professors of Law at the
University of Pennsylvania and the University of San Diego, who argue that social pathologies such as
violence, drug use, joblessness, family breakdown, and nihilism are undermining ‘middle class virtues’.4 The
path to a successful and meaningful life, they argue, is:
Get married before you have children and strive to stay married for their sake. Get the education
you need for gainful employment, work hard, and avoid idleness. Go the extra mile for your
employer or client. Be a patriot, ready to serve the country. Be neighbo[u]rly, civic-minded, and
charitable. Avoid coarse language in public. Be respectful of authority. Eschew substance abuse and
crime.
While much of this is outside of the direct control of policymakers, government does have a role in helping
people to succeed based upon hard work and merit. ‘This means ensuring that taxes aren’t so high so as to
discourage work and investment; regulation is kept to a minimum; and welfare isn’t provided in a way that
encourages dependency,’ Wild and Bushnell write.5
Australia is often failing in these principles, and the impact is being strongly felt in regional Australia.
Red tape is costing Australia’s economy $176 billion a year, reducing growth, jobs and wages.6 Energy costs,
for instance, have risen by 215 per cent since 1997; this has been driven by excessive government
regulation including renewable energy targets and incentives for network ‘gold plating’.7 High energy costs
are partly for responsible the increasing cost of living and making manufacturing and other heavy industry
unaffordable, thereby reducing job opportunities particularly in regional Australia.8
1

Daniel Wild and Andrew Bushnell, “Understanding Inequality In Australia” (Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs,
November 27, 2017).
2
John Daley, Danielle Wood, and Carmela Chivers, “Regional Patterns of Australia’s Economy and Population”
(Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs, August 2017).
3
Wild and Bushnell, “Understanding Inequality In Australia,” 26–39.
4
Amy Wax and Larry Alexander, “Paying the Price for Breakdown of the Country’s Bourgeois Values,” The Inquirer,
August 9, 2017.
5
Wild and Bushnell, “Understanding Inequality In Australia,” 5.
6
Mikayla Novak, “The $176 Billion Tax on Our Prosperity” (Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs, May 2016),
http://ipacutredtape.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/The-176-Billion-Tax-On-Our-Prosperity.pdf.
7
Daniel Wild, “How Regulation And Red Tape Makes Families Poorer” (Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs,
March 12, 2018), https://ipa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/IPA-Report-How-Regulation-and-Red-Tape-MakesFamilies-Poorer-1.pdf.
8
There are of course many causes of rising cost of living and economic structural reasons for the reduction in
manufacturing; however high energy costs are certainly an important factor.

Page 2 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

Labour force participation has declined and underemployment has increased. 9 The proportion of working
age men in the labour market has shrunk from 96 per cent in the 1950s to 79 per cent according to recent
data.10 While there are many factors at play, Australia’s high minimum wage and inflexible industrial
relations system are preventing many young and low skilled Australians from getting a job.11 Australia’s
high and uniform minimum wage, for instance, contributes to a lack of job opportunities in less well-off
regional areas.
2. Australia’s regional inequality is driven by clustering
In order to assess the appropriate policy response to regional difference it is essential to first have a good
understanding of its root causes. The main cause of economic, social and political differences between
cities and regions is the clustering of graduates in the inner-city nearby to knowledge economy jobs.
Australia has become segregated between the prosperous inner-cities, and the stressed periphery and
regions. Graduates tend to live in the inner-cities, nearby to well-paid professional jobs in finance,
information technology, and engineering, amenities such as public transport, dramatic growth in housing
values, and the services-sector driving Australia’s economic prosperity.12
Those who live near to the centre of Australia’s cities are twice as likely to have a bachelor degree than the
national average, three-quarters more likely to be in a professional job, and two-thirds more likely to have
a high household gross income in excess of $3,000 a week.13 Meanwhile, the limited remaining
manufacturing and manual jobs have been pushed to outer suburbia and the regions, where people with
lower levels of education earn lower incomes, commute longer to work, and are more likely to experience
social and economic disadvantage.
Birds of a feather flock; people with similar jobs and incomes are more likely to live close to each other.
Graduates are substantially more likely to live close to Australia’s city centres (See Figure 1). Half of
Australia’s graduates live within 30 kilometres of our capital cities, and two-thirds within 100 kilometres.14
A high proportion of graduates are concentrated in a relatively small number of postcodes (See Figure 2).A
third of Australia’s postcodes contain 72 per cent of Australia’s graduates.15
The highest proportion of graduates can be found in inner-city suburbs such as Yarralumla and Deakin in
Canberra (60 per cent graduates), Nedlands in Perth (57 per cent graduates), Princes Hill and Fitzroy North
in Melbourne (57 per cent graduates), North Sydney and St Leonards in Sydney (57 per cent graduates), and
Bardon (54 per cent graduates) in Queensland.16
Graduates are most likely to hold professional jobs (See Figure 3), and earn higher incomes (See Figure 4).
The clustering of graduates nearby to city centres in professional jobs with higher incomes is having
9

Wild and Bushnell, “Understanding Inequality In Australia,” 5.
There are both structural economic factors and government policy that helps explain this shift, see Gideon Rozner,
“Australia’s Silent Crisis In Male Employment” (Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs, August 19, 2017),
https://ipa.org.au/publications-ipa/media-releases/australias-silent-crisis-male-employment.
11
Research has consistently found that the minimum wage reduces the employment of the young and low skilled, see
David Neumark and William L. Wascher, Minimum Wages (MIT Press, 2008), http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt5hhh46.
12
This issue is discussed at length in Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development, “State of Australian
Cities 2014–2015” (Canberra, ACT: Commonwealth of Australia, 2015),
https://infrastructure.gov.au/infrastructure/pab/soac/.
13
IPA calculations based on 2016 Census, ABS
14
IPA calculations based on 2016 Census, ABS
15
IPA calculations based on 2016 Census, ABS
16
2016 Census, ABS
10

Page 3 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

substantial geographic consequences for Australia. The further from the centre of cities, the fewer the
professionals (See Figure 5) and the lower the incomes (See Figure 6). There are some exceptions – such as
mining towns that are low in graduates and high in income – however the trend holds nationally.
Figure 1. Graduates cluster nearby to Australia’s cities (Source: IPA, ABS)

Figure 2. Graduates cluster in relatively few postcodes (Source: IPA, ABS)

Page 4 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

Figure 3. Graduates are the professional class (Source: IPA, ABS)

Figure 4. Graduates receive the highest incomes (Source: IPA, ABS)

Page 5 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

Figure 5. Professionals cluster in cities (Source: IPA, ABS)

Figure 6. Higher income earners cluster near the city (Source: IPA, ABS)

Page 6 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

3. Policymakers should not intervene to prevent outcome inequality
The existence of economic inequality between cities and regions is not necessarily justification for
government intervention. To the extent that inequality between cities and regions is reflective of economic
structure and individual decision-making, it does not require a policy response. Policymakers must avoid
taking action that would reduce prosperity for both cities and regions in the name of equalising outcomes.
The role of government should be limited to delivering equal opportunities.
Australia's regional inequality, to a large extent, reflects the different economies of cities and regions. In
modern economies, cities are core drivers of innovation and entrepreneurship. Regions play a vital and
important economic role; however, they often lack the highest growth service sector industries.
British physicist Geoffrey West has written that ‘Cities are the crucible of civilisation, the hubs of
innovation, the engines of wealth creation and centres of power, the magnets that attract creative
individuals, and the stimulant for ideas, growth and innovation’.17 Building from the universal laws of
physiology, West argues that cities deliver economies of scale due to network effects. The larger the city,
the less infrastructure is required per capita and the higher the incomes and innovation.
West has found evidence of a universal ‘15 per cent rule’ across both biology and cities. Despite country
differences, every time a city doubles in population there are 15 per cent fewer petrol stations, roads, and
electrical cables per capita; meanwhile average incomes and the number of patents per capita are 15 per
cent higher.
Modern cities are achieving exponential growth because of the clustering of highly capable individuals and
innovative industry. Economic prosperity is driven by the meeting and sharing of knowledge among
likeminded people and competition between nearby firms.18 Clustering helps explain the extraordinary
success of industries in particular locations, such as technology firms in Silicon Valley, manufacturing in
Shenzhen, and finance in London.
Acknowledging the benefits of cities is not an excuse to disregard the regions; it is, nevertheless, essential
to understand that the structural factors which are driving regional inequality are beyond the reach of
sensible policy. For instance, regional inequality could be reduced through extreme social engineering, such
as telling people where they are allowed to live. However, this would not only be extremely illiberal, it
would also prevent the benefits of clustering, leading to worse economic outcomes that would ultimately
damage both cities and regions.
Cities and regions have an interdependent relationship. Historically Australia’s cities and regions have
grown together. Regions depend on cities to buy their products; cities depend on many products produced
in the regions, and vice versa. We should welcome the ability of both cities and regions to achieve strong
economic outcomes and not seek to abolish difference.
Additionally, for individuals who live in regions, non-monetary factors are often of more importance than
financial considerations. Australians live in regions for lifestyle reasons in the full knowledge of lower
incomes and less access to government services. The existence of ‘tree change’ and ‘sea change’
movements reflects individuals prioritising more open space, a shorter commute, lower housing costs, and
stronger local community over the higher potential earnings of cities.
17

Geoffrey West, Scale: The Universal Laws of Life and Death in Organisms, Cities and Companies (London, UK:
Hachette, 2017).
18
This concept of competitive advantage between nations is discussed by Michael E. Porter, The Competitive
Advantage of Nations (London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 1998).

Page 7 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

4. Policymakers should respond to regional difference and frustration by decentralising
The clustering of graduates in high paying knowledge economy jobs in the centre of Australia’s cities has
put substantial economic, political, and cultural power in their hands. There is a growing divergence in
Australian society in both income and social status between the city-dwelling, highly paid, graduate
knowledge economy workers, and the rest. Inner-city graduates dominate the centres of Australian power,
from the media and universities, to corporates, unions, and bureaucracy, and politics. Meanwhile, over the
past century, political power has increasingly centralised in Canberra, undermining Australia’s federal
structure.19
Regional Australians express high levels of political frustration, loss of trust in political institutions, and are
increasingly voting for minor parties.20 The Grattan Institute has concluded that regions have been keeping
pace economically with cities, however the ‘overall loss of economic and cultural power in the regions
looms large in regional dissatisfaction’.21 Grattan found that the further you travel from the city centre the
higher the minor party vote, reflecting dissatisfaction with Australia’s political system and loss of faith in
key institutions.
As Australia’s population, culture, and economy has become increasingly city and graduate-centric, regional
Australians are being left behind in dignity and power. Decisions that impact their lives – from banning live
animal experts, to provision of education and healthcare – are made in far-off state capitals and Canberra.
This makes it difficult for regional Australians to influence, driving political frustrations. Furthermore,
because regional population is declining relative to Australia’s growing city populations, the direct political
power of the regions through elected representatives has been reduced.
Policymakers have a responsibility to ensure that all Australians are empowered to make choices within
their own communities. The existence of difference between cities and regions is an opportunity to re-think
the structure of Australia’s governing system. Australia must deliver power back to local communities,
harnessing local knowledge, enabling more participation, and improving social and economic outcomes.
As a core principle, decision making power should be decentralised to the group of people who are
impacted by the decision.22 Local decision-making encourages competition, experimentation, and
innovation that improves outcomes.23 Decentralisation is associated with improved economic growth, as
well as better health and education outcomes.24 It also allows for more scrutiny of decision-making,
19

Brian Galligan, “Federalism,” in The Oxford Companion to Australian Politics, ed. Brian Galligan and Winsome
Roberts (South Melbourne, VIC: Oxford University Press, 2007).
20
See Danielle Wood and John Daley, “A Crisis of Trust: The Rise of Protest Politics in Australia” (Melbourne, VIC:
Grattan Institute, March 12, 2018), https://grattan.edu.au/report/a-crisis-of-trust/.
21
Wood and Daley, 3.
22
This is the ‘correspondence principle’ as outlined by Wallace E. Oates, Fiscal Federalism, Harbrace Series in Business
and Economics (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972).
23
Wallace E. Oates, “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, no. 3 (1999): 1120–49; Anwar
Shah and Jeff Huther, Applying a Simple Measure of Good Governance to the Debate on Fiscal Decentralization, Policy
Research Working Papers (The World Bank, 1999), http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-1894;
Axel Dreher, “Power to the People? The Impact of Decentralization on Governance,” SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester,
NY: Social Science Research Network, January 1, 2006), https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=881542.
24
Hansjörg Blöchliger, “Decentralisation and Economic Growth - Part 1: How Fiscal Federalism Affects Long-Term
Development,” OECD Working Papers on Fiscal Federalism (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, June 3, 2013); Nobuo Akai and Masayo Sakata, “Fiscal Decentralization Contributes to Economic
Growth: Evidence from State-Level Cross-Section Data for the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics 52, no. 1
(July 1, 2002): 93–108; Iwan Barankay and Ben Lockwood, “Decentralization and the Productive Efficiency of
Government: Evidence from Swiss Cantons,” Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 5–6 (June 2007): 1197–1218; David

Page 8 of 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 34

reducing rent seeking and corruption.25
There are a number of ways to empower the local communities. Firstly, by addressing vertical fiscal
imbalance, the mismatch between state and federal finances, which is crippling Australia’s federation by
denying states the capacity to be self-sufficient and responsible to their own citizens.26 Secondly, by
reversing efforts to centralise, such as the national curriculum, which empower Canberra bureaucrats over
communities and local organisations.27 Thirdly, by empowering local councils and community boards to
make decisions on issues such as education, healthcare, infrastructure, transport, and policing.
5. Conclusion
The challenge for policymakers is not to try to deliver equal outcomes; this inevitably requires bringing
down those who are ahead and making everyone worse off. Nevertheless, the government does have a role
in delivering equal opportunity for success and equal access to the leavers of political power.
The IPA would welcome the opportunity to speak to our submission and answer any questions at a public
hearing of the Committee.
Regards,

Matthew Lesh
Research Fellow,
Institute of Public Affairs

Cantarero Prieto and Marta Pascual Saez, “Decentralisation and Health Care Outcomes: An Empirical Analysis within
the European Union,” ResearchGate, accessed November 15, 2016,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5022809_Decentralisation_and_health_care_outcomes_An_empirical_an
alysis_within_the_European_Union; Antonis Adam, Manthos D. Delis, and Pantelis Kammas, “Fiscal Decentralization
and Public Sector Efficiency: Evidence from OECD Countries,” Economics of Governance 15, no. 1 (February 1, 2014):
17–49, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10101-013-0131-4.
25
Ben Lockwood, “The Political Economy of Decentralization,” in Handbook of Fiscal Federalism, ed. Ehtisham Ahmad
and Giorgio Brosio (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2006); Ehtisham Ahmad and Giorgio Brosio, Handbook of Fiscal
Federalism (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, 2006), 5–7; Raymond Fisman and Roberta Gatti,
“Decentralization and Corruption: Evidence across Countries,” Journal of Public Economics 83, no. 3 (March 2002):
325–45.
26
Morgan Begg, “Time To End GST Redistribution, 2018 Update” (Melbourne, VIC: Institute of Public Affairs, April 12,
2018).
27
See Chris Berg, ed., The National Curriculum: A Critique, Foundations of Western Civilisation Program (Melbourne,
Victoria: Institute of Public Affairs, 2010).

Page 9 of 9

