Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 36

30th April 2018
Senate Economics Reference Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
RE: Inquiry into the Indicators of, and Impact of, Regional Inequality in Australia
Regional Development Australia Limestone Coast (RDALC) welcomes the opportunity to make a
submission to the Senate Economics Reference Committee inquiry into the indicators of, and impact
of, regional inequality in Australia.
The Limestone Coast region encompasses an area of 21, 329 km2, has a population of over 66,000,
supports 7,319 businesses creating over 30,000 jobs in the region. Gross regional product is in excess
of $3 billion, approximately 3.4% of the States Gross State Product.
Research shows that governance models that support community- and place-based approaches and
initiatives that involve the local community and citizens lead to improved outcomes. Current
Commonwealth Government programs appear to lack focus on this important element, often
leading to a competitive silo-based approach to applications for funding rather than a joined up
approach to addressing regional issues. Whilst the Limestone Coast is facing a range of challenges it
also possesses significant local assets and resources that can be built on to create economic
prosperity.
We note the work relating to Transitioning Regional Economies undertaken by the Australian
Government Productivity and, in particular, the strategies for successful transition and development
of regions. The Productivity Commission Report states that:
“There is significant confusion, overlap and unhealthy competition between Australian, State,
Territory, and local governments in the pursuit of regional development.”
And that
“…strong leadership is critical for flexible and resilient regions. Places with strong leadership
are more likely to have better economic outcomes, as leaders guide change and help improve
the performance of a place.”

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 36

Community-based and Capacity Building Approach to Regional Development
Regional inequality is an issue that has been examined and address worldwide for over 20 years.
There have been various approaches trialled over time with varying success. A community-based
and capacity building approach to regional development developed in Canada has experienced some
success and could easily be applied across regional Australia.
Canadian Policy Research Networks Review of Rural and Regional Development Policies and
Programs discusses the benefits of community development and capacity building as a ‘broader,
more holistic approach to the overall development of communities in their economic, social,
environmental and other dimensions.’ In order for this approach to be successful they state that a
community (or in our case, a region) must have the ability to identify problems and issues, set goals
and objectives, and develop and implement strategies and initiatives so that they can lead and
control their own development.
According to the Review, the key characteristics of the community development and capacitybuilding approach to regional development include:
•
•
•
•
•

Initiatives that are comprehensive and broad in scope and address a range of issues rather
than a singular problem.
They seek to break down artificial boundaries (e.g. State and Local Government boundaries)
that are typical of the way that social and economic issues are dealt with by governments.
They are multi-sectoral and encourage partnerships and collaborative working arrangements
across economic sectors and between government, community, private, voluntary,
educational and other partners, requiring new forms of multi-level governance.
It is inclusive, involving all parts of society and the community on issues identification and
the development of solutions.
Initiatives are usually longer-term and developmental in nature, aiming to build capacity and
structures in the community and activate community resources to foster social and
economic development rather than applying funding to reduce or compensate for specific
identified problems.

Strengths-based Community Development
Whilst the Limestone Coast region has many strengths such as a diverse economic base, highly
productive agricultural and horticultural land and sustainably managed fishing resources, we are also
confronting a wide array of challenges including:
•
•
•
•
•

An aging and relatively static population
Changes to industry structure and workforce skills needs
Competing in a global economy
Inadequate social infrastructure to meet the region’s needs; and
Maintaining or improving the region’s hard infrastructure requirements.

There are recent studies that show that focussing on the deficiencies and problems of a region can
lead to the creation of a surrender mentality or narrative that both decision-makers and community
members begin to believe. In turn this can lead to the role and potential of regions and small rural
localities being overlooked by government, planners or the general population. Strengths-based
community development has its origins in community psychology and focusses on capacity building
and competence enhancement within the local community. Research demonstrates that a
recognition of strengths and assets is more likely to inspire positive change in a community than a
focus on needs and problems will. In this context ‘community’ is not restricted to boundaries or
geographical location, it is more associated with the social interactions of people.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 36

The strengths-based community development approach has the potential to take a challenge that is
perceived as negative, develop an aspirational target, and then develop innovative solutions that use
the local resource base in a sustainable way. For this to be successful, it is important for regions to
be challenged to think creatively, overcome the silo- or needs-based views and to overcome the
existing issue of indifference to being involved or participating within a community. In order to
achieve this a genuine bottom-up approach is required which in turn needs alignment between the
views of community members and government. Participatory practices need to become more openended and support new ways of working collectively to build sustainable resource development and
management.
Education, Local Workforce Skills Development and Decentralisation
RDALC recently made a submission to the SA State Government in response to the SA State inquiry
into government funded Registered Training Organisation, TAFE SA. This submission highlighted an
increasingly centralised approach to operations by TAFE SA and suggested that this has contributed
to variable experiences between disciplines. Inconsistent administrative experiences with a ‘one size
fits all’ approach were considered to be a function of operational silos with a diminished
appreciation of local market conditions being a common theme. While certain courses received
high commendation for their customer service and student support, others were considered to be
significantly impacted by funding reductions with consequences for TAFE SA’s reputation in the
community. It is also noted that there have been cancellations of courses and programs regionally
and that this is not complemented by the offering of new courses to replace or build educational
choices in the region.
Stakeholders expressed concern that the costs of courses have increased significantly impacting
access for those least able to afford education. However, use of alternative providers provides an
alternative reference point and suggests that TAFE SA is better value for money as a credible
supplier with processes that are more open to scrutiny. In many cases TAFE SA is the only training
provider and as a contributor to social cohesion and equitable education access, TAFE SA has an
important role to play.
Within the learning context, while digital technologies have significantly changed both course
delivery mechanisms and student support services, employment agencies note that for competency
based trades the need for access to ‘hands on training’ is important to employers. For apprentices
and young adults, the opportunity to learn locally without incurring the time and expense of
travelling to Adelaide is often the difference between learning and not learning. When such
workshops are not offered in this region, to attend an evening class means hours of travel,
accommodation costs and loss of working hours. This challenges perceptions of equitable access to
education.
Research has shown that service sector employment is a key contributor to successful
decentralisation. Factors like the availability of employment opportunities in service sectors such as
health and education are more likely to lead to regional population growth, and the presence of
strong tertiary education institutes in a region has also been identified as a key factor in successful
long-term regional growth strategies.
Recent experience shows that the competitive tendering approach for government funding
programs has led to centralisation and disconnection from developing services tailored to regional
areas. The implementation of decentralisation policies need to have a long-term focus, be
coordinated across multiple levels of government, and involve the simultaneous development of a
range of infrastructure and services in order to be successful. In Finland in particular, a bi-partisan

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 36

and all-government approach to developing and implementing long-term programs to address issues
such as education and regional inequality has been particularly successful.
The Role of Regional Development Australia
In South Australia RDAs are funded by all three levels of government. As impartial organisations
with a broad regional focus, RDAs are bodies designed to facilitate, partner with, and bring together
Commonwealth, State and Local Government, and the community and private sectors. RDAs are
well placed to undertake collaborative regional strategic planning that focusses on developing the
strengths and attributes of regional communities as a whole rather than in the context of council
boundaries. It is vital for Governments to recognise the strength of the RDA model and the
importance of developing policy that supports the growth of regional leadership collaboration and
capacity building, and funds the implementation of community- and strengths-based approaches to
identifying and prioritising regional issues and to developing innovative solutions that will use the
local resource base that exists in all regions across Australia. There is a significant opportunity for
RDAs across Australia to expand their role to further support communities and regions to contribute
to a bottom-up approach to sustainable regional development.
Changes to government policy settings in general and an improved coordination of federal, state and
local government fiscal policy directed towards developing and supporting community-and
strengths-based approaches to regional issues may go some way towards addressing regional
inequality.
If you have any specific questions relating to this submission please don’t hesitate to contact me.
Yours sincerely

David Wheaton
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

