Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association of Australia Inc.
"Access to Education"

Submission
to the

Economics References Committee Inquiry
into

Regional Inequality in Australia
from the
Federal Council
of the
Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association of Australia Inc.
ICPA (Aust)

April 2018

Contact:
(Mrs) Suzanne Wilson
Federal Secretary
ICPA (Aust)
122/8 Gardiner St
DARWIN NT 0800

Contact:
(Mrs) Wendy Hick
Federal President
ICPA (Aust)
Thorntonia Station
CAMOOWEAL QLD 4828

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Introduction to the Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association of Australia, ICPA (Aust)
Since 1971, ICPA (Aust) has represented families living in rural and remote regions of Australia, who
are passionate about the sustainability and prosperity of the industries they work in. Research
indicates that the ability to access affordable and appropriate educational services plays a major
factor in determining if a family will remain in rural and remote locations. The goal for our 2500
member families is to achieve equity of educational opportunity for all children living in rural and
remote areas, thus ensuring they have access to a continuing and appropriate education determined
by their aspirations and abilities rather than the location of their home.
Remote and isolated locations in Australia provide the greatest challenges for improving provision of
education options and pathways for children and families. Improving the educational outcomes for
rural and remote students requires a national approach to ensure educational delivery of a
consistently high standard no matter where the education is provided. The financial cost to families
educating children in rural and remote locations continues to rise and is a significant factor leading
to families leaving rural areas. An increasing number of rural and remote families are separating with
the mother and children relocating to larger cities and towns during the years of schooling. A drastic
measure such as this by families to reduce educational expenses, negatively impacts the family unit,
small communities and rural schools.
Rural education is interlinked with other aspects of rural communities, such as fluctuating
populations, economic influences, seasonal conditions and climate. Attempts to address inequities in
the provision of quality education will not succeed unless broader economic and social issues are
also considered. In order to efficiently and effectively meet the needs of these students, inequity
issues must be understood. Some of these children are not classified as vulnerable because they are
not impacted by extreme levels of poverty. But, due to geographic isolation from services, many
rural and remote families are expected to carry a level of out-of-pocket costs not experienced by
urban families for the education of their children from early childhood through to tertiary education.
While all Australian governments recognise the social and economic benefits of a high quality and
equitable school education system, ICPA (Aust) continues to devote an enormous amount of
volunteer hours holding relevant governments to account to address inequities. Many programs do
not reach locations where the programs are costly to administer, and jurisdictions are not providing
additional funding to ensure program objectives are met. Poor communication services also impact
greatly on students and while internet services continue to improve, access for rural students lags
well behind that available in metropolitan areas.
Recommendations highlighting the need to focus on inequities in the educational outcomes of rural
students, which report them to be at least one and a half years behind their metropolitan peers, can
be found in documents dating back many years. They mention the endemic problems facing rural
and remote education, including significant studies providing guidance and direction to those
formulating policy.
Professor Halsey in his report into the Independent Review of Regional, Rural and Remote Education
(IRRRRE)
https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/01218_independent_review_accessible.pdf
states, “The national statistics show there is a persistent relationship between location and
educational outcomes when data for the various measures is aggregated .” ICPA (Aust) hopes that as
a result of this Review, action will follow to ensure improvement in educational outcomes for all
students in rural and remote Australia.

www.icpa.com.au

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

The cost of travel to access education for average rural residents can be between two and seven
times that of their urban counterparts. The National Institute of Economic and Industry Research
(NIER) (2009) Essential Services in Urban and Regional Australia – A Quantitative Comparison
Research Report
http://www.farminstitute.org.au/publications-1/research-reports/essential-services-in-urban-andregional-australia-a-quantitative-comparison found the cost of accessing preschool and primary
schools in rural areas is at least twice that in urban areas, rising to the costs of accessing secondary
schools being 6.9 times greater for rural residents. Costs obviously increase substantially with
remoteness. This particular report only considers travel costs; accommodation, boarding, tuition,
books, uniforms etc are additional.
Closing the rural and urban divide must be a priority focus for all children in our isolated
communities; ensuring access to a continuing and appropriate education is determined by
aspirations and abilities not geographic location of the home.

www.icpa.com.au

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Executive Summary
“We cannot put a university in every regional town. We cannot put a high school in every corner of
our nation. Therefore, we must have the policy settings right so that people get greater access to
that ticket to their own future.” Barnaby Joyce (2016)
With regard to the Terms of Reference to this inquiry, ICPA (Aust)’s focus in the following
submission will be on the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular
reference to government policies and programs in the area of Education. Inequality in education
impacts building human capital and enhancing local workforce skills in rural areas. Further,
education is one of the greatest predictors of health. Inequality or inequity experienced by regional
families educating their family is extensive. As a result, this submission is broad-ranging,
comprehensive and expansive.
There are key barriers and challenges impacting on the educational outcomes for students living
beyond regional centres for those accessing small rural schools or taking part in distance education
programs on isolated stations for their primary school years. Most of these students will board away
from home in hostels and boarding schools for their secondary schooling. While similarities are seen
across all locations, the disadvantage becomes greater the further students are from educational
services.
Regional inequality in education arises from:
• Access to education
• Costs of education – social, emotional and financial
• Educational outcomes and opportunities.
ICPA (Aust)’s submission explores manifestations of regional education inequality under the
following headings:
• Boarding including hostels and second home
• Communications
• Curriculum
• Distance education
• Early childhood
• Rural schools
• Specific needs
• Tertiary and training
• Miscellaneous
1. Boarding, hostels, second home
1.1 Regional inequality in access to secondary education
1.2 Boarding facility funding for students with disabilities
1.3 Fringe Benefits Tax
1.4 Rural hardship
2. Communications
2.1 Regional inequality of internet services
2.2 Mobile coverage and telephony
2.3 Small Rural schools’ Information and Communication Technology

www.icpa.com.au

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

3. Curriculum
3.1 Regional inequality in access to and choice of curriculum
3.2 NAPLAN
3.3 Teachers and Teaching
4. Distance education
4.1 Regional inequality in distance education
4.2 Distance Education Tutor
4.3 Improving Access to Distance Education programs
4.4 Child care programs
4.5 Working holiday visa conditions
4.6 National Working with Children Check
5. Early childhood
5.1 Regional inequality in early childhood education
5.2 Early learning through distance education programs
5.3 Early learning services in rural and remote locations
5.4 Mobile early learning services
6. Rural schools
6.1 Regional inequality in rural schools
6.2 Teacher incentives
6.3 Teacher preparedness and retention
6.4 Regional communities and rural schools
6.5 Limitations of rural/remote secondary schools
7. Specific needs
7.1 Early diagnosis
7.2 Access to specialists
7.3 Teacher training
8. Tertiary and Training
8.1 Regional inequality in tertiary education
8.2 Allowances and accommodation
8.3 Training
8.4 Regional communities and further education
9. Miscellaneous
9.1 The Education Index is consistently higher than the Consumer Price Index (CPI). Educationrelated allowances, where they exist, if they increase at all, typically increase with CPI.
9.2 A National Rural Education Alliance, led by a Commissioner, would enable education of
students of rural, remote and regional Australia to be at the forefront of government
policy considerations. Inequalities in regional education could be more effectively
addressed and a collaborative approach to finding solutions would ultimately equalise
educational outcomes for children in the bush. Rural and remote education must be placed
on a separate register when delivering and funding education for rural and remote
students.
9.3 Roads in regional Australia are often in a poor state of repair and even dangerous. Physical
access to and from towns and departure points can seriously affect the ability of families to
access education, and the ability of educators to access regional students.
www.icpa.com.au

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

9.4 Regional Airfares have been the subject of a recent Inquiry into Regional Airfares. ICPA
(Aust) made a detailed submission to the Inquiry. The cost of travel to and from boarding
schools, tertiary education and training placements can be astronomical.
9.5 A Coalition election commitment of $44.7M is yet to be allocated. ICPA (Aust) has
provided some costed ideas on how this promised funding could best assist isolated
students and their families.
9.6 Rural/urban drift
The Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association of Australia, ICPA (Aust), welcomes the opportunity to
contribute to the Economics References Committee Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia.

www.icpa.com.au

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

1. Boarding, hostels, second homes
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

Regional inequality in access to secondary education
Boarding facility funding for students with disabilities
Fringe benefits tax
Rural hardship

1.1 Regional inequality in access to secondary education
•
•
•

Many regional families need to access boarding schools in order to provide a secondary
education for their children.
A lesser number of families may choose to board in hostels or establish a second home
closer to a high school.
Accessing boarding school, in particular, is a prime example of the inequality in the costs of
accessing a secondary education for regional versus urban families.

Increasing and improving the provision of educational options and pathways for children in remote
and isolated locations, present an immense challenge to authorities. The teenage years provide a
critical window of opportunity for learning and growth, as children are becoming more independent
of their parents and moving into adulthood. They are easily influenced by those around them and
the opportunities available to them. Parents place a high priority on accessing education to ensure
their children can reach their potential and grow into confident, capable adults, able to give back to
society.
Since 1973, successive Australian Governments have provided financial support through the
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Boarding Allowance to families with children who do not have
reasonable daily access to an appropriate government school. Much has changed since the AIC
scheme was first introduced: the duration of compulsory education has increased, the age of
students starting secondary school has decreased due to the introduction of ‘middle years’ and the
ability to access regional term hostels has reduced due to closures. Changes are needed to ensure
the AIC allowance meets the needs of families in the twenty-first century.
In recent years the Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AIC) was moved from the (Federal)
Department of Education and Training and its policy is now managed by the Department of Social
Services and administered through Centrelink. The AIC is NOT a welfare payment but addresses
equity of access to a quality education for rural and remote students. It is for this reason that the
allowance is different to many other allowances. Recipients may have no other association with
Centrelink. The AIC does not provide assistance to address multiple or long term social and welfare
issues and has no correlation with long-term dependence; rather, the AIC is provided to assist with
accessing education during the compulsory years of schooling and must be returned to the
Department of Education and Training.
According to rural and remote families surveyed by ICPA (Aust) in 2016, the tuition and boarding
fees alone to attend boarding school (without travel, books, uniforms, excursions and extracurricular activities) after state and commonwealth access allowances have been deducted, average
from $17,000-$35,000 per annum per student. These out-of-pocket costs are highlighted in the ICPA
(Aust) report Boarding School Access Research for Geographically Isolated Students, April 2016.
https://www.icpa.com.au/page/attachment/82/final-boarding-school-survey-icpa-aust-withcomments-2016

www.icpa.com.au

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

AIC Boarding Allowance
Two AIC Boarding Allowances are available:
•

•

Basic Boarding Allowance - assists families with students who must board away from home to
study. AIC figures for December 2017 indicate that 5,211 students were in receipt of the Basic
Boarding Allowance of $8,249 (2018 figure)
Additional Boarding Allowance - a means-tested supplementary payment to provide
additional support for lower-income families who are in receipt of the Basic Boarding
Allowance. In 2017, 1303 students or a quarter of the students receiving the basic allowance
received the AIC Additional Boarding Allowance - $2366 (2018 figure). The parental income
base limit is currently $52,706. For income over the base rate, the amount of the allowance
reduces by 20 cents per dollar of income over the base rate and also depends on the number
of children in the ‘Family Pool’.
https://www.humanservices.gov.au/individuals/enablers/parental-means-test-assistanceisolated-children-scheme.

Attending boarding school to access an appropriate education is a necessity (not a luxury) for many
children from rural and remote areas due to the distance they are from appropriate face-to-face
schooling on a daily basis. Rural and remote families are expressing a growing concern about the
affordability of educating their children during the compulsory years of schooling when boarding is
the only option. Alternatively, an increasing number of rural and remote families are separating,
with the mother and children relocating to allow their child to attend school on a daily basis. This is a
drastic measure by families to reduce educational expenses and negatively impacts the family unit,
small communities and rural schools as the younger siblings move away from the area as well.
Rural communities’ stability and sustainability relies on the availability of affordable educational
opportunities for their children. One of the key factors cited by families, and particularly by
professionals, for relocating from rural and remote communities is the lack of affordable education
opportunities that meet their children’s needs.
Boarding school costs have increased greatly, and rural and remote families are being asked to
contribute significantly more towards the cost of their children’s compulsory education. The
disparity between the Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AIC) Boarding Allowance and the
actual cost of boarding is widening exponentially. This increasing disparity is impacting on the intent
and effectiveness of the AIC allowance to provide affordable and equitable access to education for
geographically isolated families and assist these eligible families with the out-of-pocket expenses
associated with accessing compulsory education when unable to attend an appropriate government
school on a daily basis.
ICPA (Aust) recommends the parental income limit for eligibility for the Additional Boarding
Allowance be increased. The parental income threshold for the Additional Boarding Allowance of
$52,706 which is capped at approximately $64,536 depending on the number of children in the
Family Pool, is far too low and not a reasonable income benchmark for rural and remote
families. The parental income figure must be raised to a level which more accurately reflects a low
income. The Department of Immigration stipulates a 457 visa-holder must be paid at least $53,900
per annum: the minimum amount the Australian Government has determined one requires to live in
Australia in 2017/18. If a single overseas worker is decreed unable to live on a wage of less than
$53,900 per annum, it is reasonable to expect an Australian earning less than $53,900 per annum
would be considered low income. Logically, in the context of AIC parental income (the income of
both parents), a threshold of at least $107,800 is necessary for a family to live within appropriate
means.
www.icpa.com.au

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

The Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Allowances, Basic Boarding and Second Home Allowance,
must be increased significantly and the annual increase aligned with the CPI education sub-index.
Australian Bureau of Statistics data show the CPI Education Sub-index is consistently and significantly
higher than the (All Groups) CPI. For example, for the June Quarter 2016 to June Quarter 2017, the
CPI was 1.9% while the Education sub-index was 3.3%. CPI-based increases in education allowances
will therefore inevitably lead to the observed divergence between allowances and costs, as
described above.
While the matter of funding is often mentioned when addressing inequities, ICPA (Aust) would like to
take this opportunity to highlight the level of government funding for students in remote schools
with a high indigenous population. In many cases it can be more than $40,000 per student when the
base funding for Schooling Resource Standard for high school students was set at $13,000 per
student. ICPA (Aust) maintains to keep families in rural Australia, they should have the option of
accessing the Assistance for Isolated Children’s Boarding Allowance, currently set at a maximum of
$10,615 per year ($8,249 Basic Boarding Allowance plus $2366 Additional Boarding Allowance if the
family qualifies), which goes some way to meet the costs associated with boarding students’ great
distances from home.
Students who board away from home, despite attending larger schools where they may be have
access to wider experiences and assistance of career advisers etc., can also find themselves
estranged from the rest of the boarding house cohort when not following a stereotypical career
path. This is particularly so for boarding students, whose family may be over a thousand kilometres
away, leaving them only peers and school staff with which to discuss their goals, often leaving them
to be influenced by what others are doing around them rather than their own true ambition. These
students often are not exposed to a wider influence or knowledge of available opportunities and
without significant support, can easily decide to blend in and be influenced by the choices of their
peers.

1.2 Boarding facility funding for students with specific needs
While schools may be funded for the education of students with disabilities, boarding facilities are
often not provided with extra resources to cater for these students.
ICPA (Aust) advocates that additional resources be made available to boarding facilities for students
who board away from home and are identified on the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on
School Students with Disability (NCCD). Broadly speaking a disability is classified as a condition that
may require class or curriculum adjustment e.g. health conditions such as asthma, diabetes or
allergies, mental health conditions and recognised cognitive learning difficulties.
Boarding facilities play a significant role in supporting boarding students to participate fully in their
education. Additional resources should be allocated to the boarding facilities as well as the school
per se to support boarders with a disability.
The need for improved mental health services for young people from regional, rural and remote
areas has also increased. The current spotlight on boarders’ mental health after the tragic suicide of
Dolly Everett makes this suggestion from ICPA (Aust) to address the inequities in access to education
even more of an imperative. At present there is not a dedicated mental health section to assist
regional, rural and remote students with the unique challenges that they encounter as they try to
access education or try to adjust to being so far away from their family and home. Geographically
isolated students with rural backgrounds often along with their families, experience devasting fire,
flood, drought, industry crisis as well as financial hardship. The pressure of knowing the cost of their
www.icpa.com.au

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

education and the financial struggle this brings to their family, is a significant weight for these
students to bear alongside of the feelings of guilt they may feel for not being at home helping where
they are needed. In addition to this, rural and remote students often go away to school having had
large responsibilities on the family property or in the family business, and a ‘wisdom beyond their
years' but also can be lacking in social experiences that provide them with the skills to adequately
cope with bullying and other situations they may face.

1.3 Fringe Benefits Tax
Exemption from Fringe Benefits Tax (FBT) - Employers Assisting with Educational Costs for
Employees
In an effort to attract and retain staff in rural and remote locations, some employers offer their staff
a financial contribution towards educational expenses of their children. However, these payments
incur a fringe benefits tax which negatively impacts the employer and the intent of the contribution.
In some cases, the employer chooses to pay a higher wage/salary to the employee rather than incur
the FBT on the education assistance. This is also problematic for families as a higher income bracket
could affect eligibility for income-tested assistance such as the AIC Additional Boarding Allowance or
Youth Allowance.
The Australian Tax Office states some benefits, for example, living away from home allowance,
receive concessional treatment in relation to Fringe Benefits Tax (FBT). ICPA (Aust) recommends that
benefits paid by an employer to assist an employee with the costs of having their child ‘living away
from home’ for education could be treated in a similar way.
The removal of Fringe Benefits Tax on contributions to employees’ children’s education expenses
will potentially encourage families to stay in the bush, improve recruitment and retention of families
and inspire employers to contribute towards the increasingly high costs of boarding school. These
outcomes would be consistent with ‘Developing the North’ aspirations.
Exemption from Fringe Benefits Tax – Schools/boarding facilities providing accommodation for
staff
For many years ICPA (Aust) has lobbied the Federal Government to change policy on Fringe Benefits
Tax (FBT) as it applies to essential boarding school staff required to ‘live in’ to perform their duty of
care of residential students in metropolitan boarding institutions. This tax is negatively impacting on
the cost of an equitable education for isolated students.
The burden of these taxes is especially onerous given that they are levied on the day-to-day living
and employment expenses that boarding schools incur and come on top of already significant costs
that families must meet. In addition, the taxes appear to be levied across sectors in a most
inequitable and ad hoc manner. For example, FBT on boarding supervisors’ accommodation adds an
estimated $1000 per year to the cost of school fees, yet it is not levied on aged care facilities or
military establishments. As another example, GST is levied on boarding school food, yet not on the
food provided in aged care facilities.

1.4 Rural Hardship
Events such as drought, catastrophic fire, flood, cyclone and other rural disasters e.g. unforeseen
industry impacts of live export ban or dairy crisis, can last for numerous years with long-term effects
on regional families. Families affected by such events are placed under incredible duress in trying to
meet the costs of education of their children. Geographically isolated students should not be
disadvantaged or unable to complete their schooling due to such circumstances.
Implications of this inability to meet schooling costs during these toughest times include:
www.icpa.com.au

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

•
•
•
•
•

rising education cost debt (in many cases families going further into overdraft)
children being removed from boarding school
splitting the family and moving to town in order to access schooling
choosing between siblings to send or keep at boarding school and
negative mental health effects on both parents and students already affected by the
hardship event/s is exacerbated by the worry of funding schooling.

The introduction of a Rural Hardship Education Fund would ensure educational continuity for
children of the many families under financial pressure due to times of long-term drought, periods of
drought recovery and other rural hardships, who simply cannot afford to educate their children any
more.
Mental health is a large concern in rural communities and struggling to pay educational fees
exacerbates the pressure. There is parental anguish at not being able to fund a basic requirement for
their children and the children themselves are well aware of the cost and financial sacrifice that their
families are making in order for them to be educated, creating feelings of guilt and helplessness, a
burden a child should not have to bear when it comes to education.
ICPA encourages the establishment of a Rural Hardship Education Fund to assist families when the
out-of-pocket costs associated with educating children at boarding school cannot be met as a result
of rural hardship conditions.

www.icpa.com.au

10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

2.

Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
2.1 Regional inequality of internet services
2.2 Mobile coverage and telephony
2.3 Small schools’ ICT

2.1 Regional inequality of internet services
Students of rural and remote Australia enrolled in Schools of Distance Education, rely heavily on
telecommunications to access daily lessons, via both telephone and internet. Most would be in the
0.7% of the population with no access to any mobile network and the majority would also be in the
3% of the population who will rely on satellite to access the internet. These people however, occupy
over 98% of the Australia’s landmass.
Our member families also attend small rural schools dependent on internet for schoolwork,
research, teacher assistance/mentoring, specific needs sessions as well as landlines for contact for
teacher support, emergencies and general administration tasks of a school. Quite a few rural small
schools are not in mobile coverage areas and struggle to receive adequate internet service.
Some of our members are still experiencing problems with ongoing use of the Sky Muster™ satellite
internet services including dropouts, poor speeds, slowed services, insufficient data amounts and
connection difficulties. There are also ongoing issues around the quality and reliability of the
software utilised in some states distance education lessons on the nbn™ Sky Muster™ satellite
service.
Commonplace online activities for those living in cities such as watching lectures, banking, cloud
computing, working on research projects or watching television, are nearly impossible for those not
very far from the cities themselves. Unlimited internet plans are available in cities, however, are
unheard of in regional areas.
Internet connectivity is the key to providing regional students with access to endless curriculum
opportunities and extra-curricular endeavours. Virtual reality is a part of everyday life for today’s
children and yet students in rural and remote educational settings are rarely being provided with
comparable opportunities afforded to those children in highly-connected urban settings. Access to
reliable and adequate internet, with regard to speed, quality, capabilities and cost of the service
must be a priority for state and federal governments so we can ensure the gap between urban and
rural education does not continue to widen.
The Education Port offered as part of nbn‘s public interest premises policy has gone a long way to
address the gap. The Education Port is provided on Sky Muster™ satellite installations for distance
education students. The quality of the distance education experience is also determined by the
video-conferencing software used by each State Education Department; Western Australia uses
Centra Symposium, which South Australia found unsuitable. South Australia uses Webex, the
Northern Territory and New South Wales use REACT (a purpose-built Distance Education delivery
program) and Queensland uses Blackboard Collaborate. Costs are one factor affecting the State’s
adoption of one form of delivery over another. Some states’ Departments of Education provide
hardware and internet connections for interactive distance learning and others require families to
provide both hardware and internet. Naturally, the latter involves costs to families. More cooperation between states would avoid the wheel being reinvented. It is also essential that with a
digital curriculum, each platform for delivery provides equitable access and quality for students
across Australia.

www.icpa.com.au

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Education Port for non-distance education students
The provision of an Education Port is a huge assistance for those studying via distance education
however it is not currently available to students’ studying at a tertiary level, students of rural schools
and students returning home from boarding school during holiday breaks who are required to
complete assessments. Again, the internet could be a great equaliser but instead of bridging the
divide it is in fact accentuating the widening gap. The concern over reliability is causing a negative
impact in uptake, though many of our members have no option but to utilise the nbn™ Sky Muster™
satellite for their internet needs.
Priority internet repairs for Distance Education students residing in rural and remote areas must be
factored into policy as currently students can be offline for many weeks waiting for their service to
be repaired.
The Fair Use Policy (FUP) in place with Sky Muster™ plans negatively impacts those same students.
The FUP is an impediment for rural students and not at all comparable to what is offered in
metropolitan areas. Peak and off-peak times are very constrictive and limiting and "Shaping", which
happens when the monthly data allowance is exceeded, restricts much of our members’ ability to
conduct their business or study unless they are a distance education student.
The announcement in late June 2017, by the former Minister for Regional Communications and
nbn™, to confirm the increase in wholesale data capacity for the Sky Muster™ satellite service was
very welcome. The doubling of the maximum monthly wholesale data limits and increasing average
peak downloads plans by up to 50 per cent on the Sky Muster™ platform will make some difference
to regional, rural and remote students.
Unmetered educational websites: An added bonus for many families has been Telstra’s initiative
which has seen the unmetering of educational websites on mobile broadband. This has assisted
many families who need to access their curriculum this way by allowing them to reduce data usage
significantly, however only those in a mobile footprint are able to take advantage of this benefit.
Support services
There is currently a gap in understanding, individual problem-solving and knowledge broker services
for telecommunications in rural and regional Australia, which in turn affects rural students. Rural
users are struggling to keep up with changing telecommunications, infrastructure, plans and
providers.
Rural and remote telecommunication users require support for understanding new internet and
phone options and a ‘third-party’ problem-solving resource to identify best solutions, best providers
and best plans in different locations. Service providers responding to regional customer queries,
concerns and issues MUST have a comprehensive understanding of their clientele’s regional
circumstances. nbn™ has recently acknowledged this need by establishing ‘nbn™ local’; a new team
dedicated to improving the customer experience on the nbn™ access network for regional and
remote Australia.
The offering of tailored telecommunications support services, including advocacy, education and
problem solving with technology issues and opportunities, in rural and remote Australia would be of
huge benefit for these students and their families.

www.icpa.com.au

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

2.2 Mobile coverage and telephony
Mobile service coverage in rural and remote black spot areas: With regards to rural and remote
education, having mobile coverage is highly valued by those lucky enough to have it as it affords a
backup for the voice and data services of ‘on-air’ lessons when landlines and/or internet services are
out. Having mobile coverage also allows distance education students to continue their schoolwork
and lessons if they are travelling between home and town or away from their main schoolroom (i.e.
in a stock camp for a few weeks with their family). Many educational sites are unmetered by Telstra;
a boon for many families that are able to access their curriculum this way.
The selection of priority regions for the implementation of Mobile Phone coverage should include a
priority for rural and remote schools currently without mobile phone service. Most rural and
remote schools are evacuation points in the event of emergencies occurring in the district.
Telephony is also a major concern particularly for those students studying via distance
education. Landline telephone services play a significant role in providing the voice services to
accompany ‘on-air’ lessons with teachers and classmates, as well as additional lessons and seeking
assistance from teachers at their School of Distance Education. As a large portion of geographically
isolated distance education students live outside of mobile coverage areas, maintaining landlines
and ensuring that these services continue is paramount for distance education students. When
internet services fail, the availability of landline phones ensures that distance education students still
have connectivity and are able to continue participating in their lessons, even if the video/online
portion is out. At this time, VoIP is not considered to be a reliable or suitable source for audio in
distance education lessons, and until such time as an alternative, appropriate and reliable voice
technology is available, landline telephony services need to exist for distance education students and
regional families.

2.3 Small Rural Schools’ ICT
Educational outcomes in small communities are compromised by the absence of adequate internet
connectivity in their local schools. In regional areas, specialist subjects e.g. languages and music,
require technology because specialist teachers are based elsewhere. Interaction with specialist
teachers cannot be accessed consistently, if at all, in some small schools. Online access to services
like speech therapy and other Allied Health offerings cannot be relied upon to complement the
sparse face-to-face services in small communities.
Professor Halsey in his IRRRRE report states, “ICT access is an issue not just for schools, but also for
homes with school-aged children who attend day/boarding schools as well as those who study
through distance education or home-schooling. NBN Co has recently expanded eligibility to include
home-schooled students who are isolated for geographic/medical reasons.”
Online NAPLAN, which is being rolled out across all states is reliant on the availability of adequate
bandwidth for students to complete the assessment online. This is bound to be problematic for
many rural and remote schools. Furthermore, the access for rural and remote secondary schools to a
full senior curriculum through digital extension is also not possible in many schools’ due to unreliable
internet.
ICT in regional Australia is a whole of government problem as it goes to the very heart of keeping our
rural communities and schools alive. Reliable, fast, affordable connectivity in the modern era is
necessary to provide an urban-comparable education in rural and remote schools.

www.icpa.com.au

13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

3.

Curriculum
3.1 Regional inequality in access to and choice of curriculum
3.2 NAPLAN
3.3 Teachers and Teaching

3.1 Regional inequality in access to and choice of curriculum
Regional inequality in access to and choice of curriculum options arises from difficulties attracting
and retaining mainstream teachers as well as specialist teachers. Even for students in regional towns
with high schools, boarding schools in metropolitan areas can offer a greater breadth of curriculum
and extra-curricular, offerings. Curriculum is often one of the reasons cited in the selection of a
particular boarding school. Students opting to stay in regional areas for secondary school may need
to access some subjects online or by teleconferencing with classes delivered by a teacher based
elsewhere. ICPA (Aust) is adamant every student is different and regional families must have choices
in order to see their children achieve their potential.
The need for a more consistent approach to curriculum and schooling has been talked about for
many years. Both the National Curriculum and the needs-based school funding are in line with the
expectations of the modern-day family, who seek consistency in education and outcomes regardless
of where someone lives or their level of disadvantage.
In the case of rural and remote students studying via distance education, given the temptations lying
just outside the school room door (property life, mustering, animals etc.), online lessons and units of
work must be engaging and inclusive. While students should emerge with some worldliness, the
tailoring of coursework to ensure the interest and engagement of students is important. For
example, agriculture in schools can serve to integrate many facets of the curriculum while being
relevant to the rural student.

ICPA (Aust) has welcomed a number of changes to the National Curriculum which have and will
benefit rural students, including:
Phonics
Many of our member families teach via distance education programs. The use of phonics is well
supported and the news that the new curriculum would also mandate the use of phonics to teach
children to sound out words and syllables, instead of making them learn by rote or guess words
through the contentious ‘whole language’ was most welcome. In 2017, Minister Birmingham
announced the introduction of the assessment of phonological awareness in Year 1 and stated, "The
Australian Government is committed to introducing the Year 1 check to ensure that every parent
and teacher is able to judge if a student is receiving effective literacy and numeracy instruction in the
early years of schooling. It will identify, as early as possible, those students experiencing difficulties
in literacy and numeracy so that appropriate intervention strategies can be put in place before the
achievement gap grows.”
https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/faqs_year_1_check_-_for_website__updated_31082017_clean_0.pdf.
Support for teachers is welcomed by rural and remote families who often struggle to get suspected
difficulties recognised, especially in the distance education setting and small schools.
Agriculture in Education
ICPA (Aust) welcomed the Australian Government’s commitment to invest $2 million into developing
Agriculture in Education. The materials showcase the diversity and economic importance of food and
fibre production in Australia. The online teaching and learning resources are aligned to the
Australian Curriculum learning areas including science and geography. The incorporation of
www.icpa.com.au

14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Agriculture into the Curriculum can assist with engagement of regional students and can broaden
the aspirations of urban students to consider vocations in regional areas: potentially having a
positive impact on the workforce, human capital and economic viability of rural communities.
New optional area of learning for year 9 and 10 students: Work Studies Years 9–10
https://www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/f-10-curriculum/work-studies/introduction/is an applied
learning curriculum that adapts discipline-based learning to work contexts. This requires a variation
in the approach to curriculum design and content descriptors and elaborations, as they need to be
active. It also allows for a cross-curriculum disciplinary mode of delivery.
Safe driving practices in high school curriculum
At our recent conference, ICPA members proposed that topics essential to safe driving practices be
incorporated into the high school curriculum, stating: ‘The spotlight has been put on the increase of
deaths on our rural roads. We believe that with correct training and making our new, young drivers
aware of the perils found on rural roads, we can lessen these statistics. Rural students often have
difficulty organising this education on their own because of boarding commitments or no services
being available in rural towns.’ Topics which may be included in this course: defensive driving
practices, safe driving practices, basic first aid, basic car maintenance and obtaining your Learner’s
Permit.
Modified Curriculum: In remote communities with high schools, the curriculum is often modified to
meet the educational and life-skills needs of indigenous students, in order to address poor
outcomes. Such high schools may be declared Bypass or Limited Program Schools by government,
which allows some families who live relatively close to the school to be eligible for AIC and to school
their children elsewhere. In some communities, declaration of a bypass school is controversial. One
argument maintains enabling families to access the allowances to send children elsewhere for
schooling is detrimental to a small community. Conversely, it is argued keeping some children in the
community is detrimental to their education. ICPA (Aust)’s firm stance is families and students living
in or near these communities must have a real choice when accessing education while living in these
locations.

3.2 NAPLAN
NAPLAN Assessment: Australia’s first national test of literacy and numeracy is a powerful tool in
measuring students’ achievement in core literacy and numeracy skills. A 2016 report by the Grattan
Institute (VIC), Widening gaps: what NAPLAN tells us about student progress
https://grattan.edu.au/report/widening-gaps/ outlines a number of concerns for rural and remote
students and how changes might be implemented. The report states, “Policymakers should act on
these findings. Student progress and learning gaps should be put at the centre of education policy. In
light of the large spread in achievement, policymakers should give schools better support to target
teaching to each child’s needs. And, given the very large gaps, policy leaders must work harder to
improve the progress of disadvantaged students so that every child in every school can achieve their
potential.”
NAPLAN Online: ICPA has welcomed consultations with ACARA throughout the development,
trialling and implementation associated with NAPLAN going online. While problems around
connectivity are a major concern for many of our members, we believe these concerns have been
taken seriously and every effort is being made to overcome them. The fact that students will receive
results to their tailored test in a matter of weeks, compared to the current process which can take
months, will benefit students and teachers enormously.

www.icpa.com.au

15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Students identified as high achievers in NAPLAN: Addressing the needs of students who are
performing well below the national benchmark is very important. Also, students being educated in
rural and remote locations who are performing well above the school or national average should
also be supported in achieving their potential, particularly when there are very limited opportunities
in small and often isolated communities.

3.3 Teachers and teaching
Secondary teachers teaching outside the area they are qualified for
Often, due to staff shortages in rural and remote locations, secondary teachers are teaching subjects
that they have little knowledge in. This is a concern for students who rely on the knowledge and
expertise of a teacher trained in that field. It is hoped that these issues can be overcome when the
difficulties of attracting and retaining teachers to rural and remote locations are addressed.
Further information on Teachers and Teaching and other topics relating to rural and remote
education inequalities were included in our submission to the Independent Review into Regional,
Rural and Remote Education.
https://www.icpa.com.au/documents/download/1094/federal-submissions/federal-submissions2017/submission-independent-review-into-regional-rural-and-remote-education-2017.pdf

www.icpa.com.au

16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

4.

Distance Education
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6

Regional inequality in distance education
Distance Education Tutor
Improving Access to Distance Education programs
Child care programs
Working holiday visa conditions
National Working with Children Check

4.1 Regional inequality in distance education
Regional inequality in distance education arises from the significant cost to geographically isolated
families with no choice other than to educate their children via a distance education program.
Further inequalities arise from the extreme paucity of child care services for younger siblings and the
cost and rigidity of In Home Care programs and the exclusion of nannies and governesses from
agricultural work in working holiday visa dispensations. These inequalities are very real factors
affecting the retention of families in rural and remote communities and have workforce implications.
ICPA (Aust) has developed several proposals to help alleviate these inequalities which are outlined
below.
‘Distance education’ has become a catch phrase for almost any type of schooling done from the
home/online in recent years. Children who must access their education via a state approved
Distance Education program due to geographic isolation are becoming a minority, even in some of
the purpose-designed Schools of Distance Education. The needs of geographically isolated distance
education students need to be fully recognised when making decisions around ‘distance education’
as a whole.
Families who have no other option than schooling their children through distance education
programs, need more support.
In order to ensure adequate educational support and outcomes for rural and remote families
undertaking distance education due to geographical isolation, differentiation needs to be made
between these families and those who undertake distance education programs as a personal choice.

4.2 Distance Education Tutor
Families undertaking distance education are required to provide a supervisor for the home school
room, usually known as the ‘home tutor’ or ‘distance education tutor’. This role is a full-time,
demanding and long-term commitment. Often the role is filled by the mother who is then foregoing
an opportunity to be a wage earner or to work on a family farm. Families may have to employ more
staff to compensate for the loss of the mother from the workforce. Alternatively, some families may
choose to employ a home tutor, usually a governess. Whether through foregoing a wage,
employment of more staff or employment of a home tutor, the cost to families of distance
education cannot be underestimated. Also, significant numbers of families leave rural and remote
areas or split up families rather than tackle distance education. Sometimes they have tried and failed
or cannot afford the loss of a wage-earner or a carer for younger siblings.
While it is important to improve retention of top teachers in rural locations, the individuals who fill
the role of distance education tutor in the home also need to be considered and better supported in
the delivery of education and access to affordable child care. While often not qualified teachers,
home tutors are undeniably on the front line of children’s education and their wellbeing and
retention is critical.
The value of the role of the distance education tutor within a distance education setting needs to be
acknowledged through both financial incentives and a formal recognition of their skills. Without
www.icpa.com.au

17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

distance education tutors who are supported, prepared and readily able to implement distance
education materials on a daily basis within independent home schoolrooms, distance education
could not succeed.
Recognition of the financial impact on families who must provide a distance education tutor
For around 1500 families living in isolated regions of Australia, the only means of accessing an
education for their children is via distance education programs. While the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Distance Education Allowance assists with the setup of the classroom and ongoing
costs associated with this method of education, it is not possible without a tutor in the home
schoolroom. Families are required to provide and fund the entire costs associated with providing a
tutor, which necessitates the employment of additional staff or a family member (often the mother)
who must often forgo an income, for many years in order to fill the role. ICPA (Aust) advocates the
introduction of a Distance Education Teaching Allowance ($6,000 per family per annum), as financial
recognition of the essential work a tutor performs. This is a small cost, considering these families are
filling a role the government cannot.
Recognition of prior learning for Distance Education Tutors. While some States recognise the many
years spent as a distance education tutor when applicants take part in formal training, ICPA (Aust)
would like to see this extended to all States. All distance education tutors should be given
educational recognition of the services they have performed for their children over the years.
Educational recognition in the form of Recognised Prior Learning for distance education tutors who
have supervised students’ learning for a minimum of 2 years, should count towards a distance
education/teaching certificate/diploma. A formal recognition of the role of the distance education
tutor and the skills acquired would provide incentive for those considering employment in this role.
This was mentioned in Professor Halsey’s report into the Independent Review into Regional, Rural
and Remote Education (IRRRRE) where he said, “After discussions with a number of these parents as
part of the Review and on previous occasions as well as through reading submissions, it is time to
formally recognise their expertise. A way to do this is by using the established protocols of
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) as detailed in the Australian Qualifications Framework. (AQF)
Regulatory and accreditation bodies would need to work with states and territories to ensure the
necessary compliance and quality teaching requirements are met.
The RPL process should not be onerous but provide sufficient evidence to enable a confident
determination of the level of an award, for example, a portfolio of the learning and skills a person
has developed through being a distance education home tutor and an opportunity to speak about
their experiences. The DE School they are associated with, or were, could be invited to assist with
verification as well as determining the award. The criteria for AQF level 3 or 4 appear to be a good
fit.”
The role of distance education tutor/supervisor in the home classroom does not meet the
‘teaching criteria’ for recognised teaching time. While some of these fully qualified teachers are
working in the home classrooms, their time there does not count towards recency of practice. Preservice teachers who participate in Distance Education classrooms also do not have their teaching
time recognised, this is partially due to interpretation of their being ‘supervised’ by another teacher,
despite being the day-to-day managers of an often multi-age classroom, at times for an extended
period of time.
Pre-service teachers and those who already hold teaching accreditation could be supervised
remotely by a principal or senior teacher at the School of Distance Education (SDE) they are working
with to allow the logging of their teaching hours (even if at an adjusted rate). This would be a huge

www.icpa.com.au

18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

benefit in enabling existing teachers to remain current and for Pre-Service teachers to consider
working in a distance education home schoolroom.
Distance Education tutors need ongoing support from the Schools of Distance Education (SDE).
SDE teachers should also have training in Specific Needs so that they have the ability to provide
flexibility in the delivery of the curriculum to assist Distance Education tutors in the planning of the
student's schoolwork according to his/her needs.
It would be beneficial for distance education teachers to be encouraged to become familiar with
their students or families, perhaps in the format of home schoolroom visits, as occurs in some
Schools of Distance Education.
Respect for the home tutor
The distance education tutor knows their student, and never more so than when that home tutor is
the child’s mother. While the tutor may not be teacher-trained, they are nevertheless
knowledgeable and can have spent many years in the schoolroom. A distance education tutor or
parent’s concerns about a child’s learning will rarely be baseless. It is important that teachers
respect the concerns of the tutor and endeavour to work with them in identifying and diagnosing
learning difficulties or in providing evidence to the contrary. Mutual respect and understanding will
be key to harmonious parent/tutor/teacher relationships which can only benefit the child and make
the teacher’s life easier too. Belittling, ignoring or dismissing a tutor’s concerns are all too common,
especially in the distance education setting where specific learning needs specialists may be scarce
and where the student is not in a face-to-face situation.
Furthermore, teachers at distance education schools need to be equipped with an understanding of
the nature of geographically isolated students’ school environment and the role of the home tutor
within the home schoolroom. Many of the teachers in distance education, and furthermore policy
makers in this area have never visited a home schoolroom and have limited knowledge of the school
experience of the families and their everyday life, which, given the nature of distance education,
heavily impacts on their education.

4.3 Improving Access – Distance Education (DE)
A variety of methods of learning should be provided in Schools of Distance Education. In South
Australia for example, all students’ studies are online, so if their internet is dropping out or very slow
or even ‘shaped’ due to full usage of data for the month, an alternative method of accessing and
doing schoolwork should be provided. Communication problems are hindering educational
opportunities for these families.
Distance education delivery methods for geographically isolated families need to remain flexible
and based in regional and rural communities. Difficulties in accessing an online program not only
apply to South Australian students, there are many DE families undertaking their schooling from
stock camps, campdrafts, fencing camps, travelling shows/circuses all across Australia and even
some out at sea (students on prawn trawlers and fishing boats, etc.), who would find their study
compromised if they had to access their learning materials solely online. While most other states still
have Schools of Distance Education (SDE) that will provide print-based materials for families
requiring them, not all SDE schools still have this option for families. Some DE schools do not supply
print-based material even if requested. If a family requires print-based materials, they may enrol
their children in another SDE which may not necessarily be their local SDE but does supply print
material or is flexible with materials. When students are unable to attend their closest SDE, they can
have difficulty accessing community or school activities where they would be able to interact with
peers more regularly. It is also imperative that distance education for geographically isolated
www.icpa.com.au

19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

students continues to be based in regional and rural communities to ensure ongoing opportunities
to interact with their teachers and peers and participate in school activities.
Distance education students access their daily learning in a variety of ways, and most depend on a
blend of learning materials determined by the school and communications infrastructure.
Currently, a large portion of distance education students utilise Sky Muster satellite services for
internet and are dependent on landline phones for the voice portion of their ‘on air’ lessons and
supplementary sessions. To date, VoIP has not been highly successful for the voice portion of
distance education lessons. VoIP among other things has latency issues, has been unreliable and
depends on a power source at all times in order to work. Several Schools of Distance Education
recommend that their students do not use VoIP for their school voice requirements. After the
release of the Productivity Commission’s Report into the Universal Service Obligation earlier in 2017,
there has been great concern that the USO that ensures that landlines remain available to families
with no other reliable telephony service may be dissolved and the future of landline phones
uncertain. Working, well-maintained landline phone services are vital for students and families living
in rural and remote areas as these landline services provide necessary voice access for distance
education.
Distance education and specific education needs – without face-to-face teacher interaction,
students in the distance education setting can potentially be ignored. As in many mainstream
schools, distance education schools should have teachers trained in specific learning needs to assist
in early identification and management of difficulties and can assist home tutors and teachers to
adapt the curriculum and ensure it meets the needs and abilities of the student. Online lessons
should be relevant, interactive, and achievable and engaging for all students and extension activities
for some students could be conducted in extra lesson time. It is important for ALL students to have
the opportunity to succeed.
As connectivity continues to improve it is anticipated that secondary subjects not being taught in
rural schools will be accessible via distance education programs. Care should be taken not to assume
this platform meets the learning needs of all students in rural and remote locations. Learning via
distance education at the secondary level is not conducive to all learning styles. Students need to be
independent, self-motivated learners if they are to achieve good results. While one or two subjects
being taught through virtual classrooms can be beneficial, to go beyond that can be detrimental for
many students, particularly when other life experiences are very limited in their community.
The Remote Air Subsidy Scheme (RASS) https://infrastructure.gov.au/aviation/regional/rass.aspx is
a service that improves access to education for distance education students by subsidising a regular,
weekly air service which carries essential goods such as educational materials and is highly valued by
the families and the more than 366 communities that it services. When programs such as RASS,
which provide essential services to those living in remote areas and communities, are being
evaluated, consideration must be given to the true lack of access to basic services and goods that the
people in these areas have. Support for these programs must be maintained and the application
guidelines must be practical for those isolated families seeking to access the service.

4.4 Child Care Programs
The Family Assistance Law should be revisited so In Home Care Educators and Nannies are
explicitly able to supervise students in the Distance Education classroom.
Child care programs could potentially play a very important part in enabling families to deliver
distance education lessons at home in often isolated locations where no child care services exist.

www.icpa.com.au

20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

The needs of families living in these locations differ considerably to those living in urban areas.
Greater flexibility within programs is required, together with the broadening of measures within
existing schemes such as the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC), which is intended to assist
families whose children remain in their care while taking part in schooling through distance
education, especially as more emphasis is being placed on the need for recognised early childhood
education. For the parents taking on the role of distance education tutor, (often the mother) they
find themselves unable to take part in the workforce due to the enormous commitment which goes
unrecognised financially by government.
While our organisation is pleased with some of the changes already introduced which assist in
meeting the needs of families unable to access mainstream child care services, ICPA (Aust)’s
concerns are with the families who need assistance because the children remain in the care of their
parents and they have no choice other than to educate their children through distance education
schooling (including early childhood learning). A common-sense approach in order to overcome
workforce shortages in isolated locations, would be for the educator to also fill the role of distance
education tutor.

4.5 Working holiday visa conditions
Teachers, Distance Education tutors and Nannies should be added to the current ‘Specified work’
list for Working Holiday Visas, so that they can help deliver Distance Education on rural and
remote properties.
The 2nd year working holiday visas 417 and 462, are not available for distance education
tutors/teachers or nannies from overseas in rural and remote areas, despite being rural work.
However, with recent developments in Northern Australia, second-year visa applicants could be
accepted there, on the 462 working holiday visa, if they worked for 3 months in agriculture the
previous year. Also, in Northern Australia, if working for 6 months for one employer on a working
holiday maker visa 417, permission can now be granted to stay another 6 months with that
employer; this would help provide work for distance education tutors in other rural and remote
areas if the same conditions applied. In the distance education schoolroom, 12 months’ support
would be more beneficial than just 6 months to support the importance of continuity and
consistency.
Occasionally, an overseas couple might wish to work on a rural or remote property; both would
enjoy the cultural experience and while one partner might be able to work in the paddock, the other
partner is unable to work in the distance education schoolroom as this is not on the ‘specified work’
list. By extending the Northern Australia (Working holiday visa 462 and 417) rule s
http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pub
s/rp/rp1617/Quick_Guides/WorkingHoliday to other rural and remote areas of Australia, the
second-year visa would be accessible to nannies and distance education tutors available under
agriculture. Also, the extension of the 6 months to 12 months working with one employer which
would provide a better solution for rural families and a better experience for overseas workers who
wish to remain with an employer.

4.6 National Working with Children Check
A National Working with Children Check (WWCC) would help in obtaining top teachers to assist in
the Distance Education schoolroom. The process of obtaining the Working with Children Check in
every state, is expensive and impedes VISE (Volunteers for Isolated Students’ Education) and REVISE
(Retired Educator Volunteers for Isolated Students’ Education) tutors and travelling teachers who
wish to help various families interstate. The length of time it takes to secure a WWCC from different
states also delays the commencement of duties for some who take up governessing positions.
www.icpa.com.au

21

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

As
per
the
Royal
Commission
Report
into
Child
Abuse,
http://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/getattachment/7ecd3db9-0b17-483e-9a0e8fb247140f3e/Working-with-Children-Checks-Report. ICPA (Aust) recommends that the Federal
Government work with the states to provide a National Working with Children’s Check (WWCC). This
will enable travelling retired teachers, VISE/REVISE volunteers etc. to provide assistance to distance
education families’ interstate easily as well as providing assurance to families that these volunteers
can be trusted on isolated properties with their children.

www.icpa.com.au

22

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

5. Early childhood
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4

Regional inequality in early childhood education
Early learning through distance education programs
Early learning services in rural and remote locations
Mobile early learning services

5.1 Regional inequality in early childhood education
ICPA (Aust) maintains educational opportunities must commence with the early learning years, with
a focus on the year prior to starting formal schooling and proposes the following changes in order to
expand and enhance the opportunities for rural and remote students.
Regional inequality in early childhood education arises from lack of access to early childhood
programs and the cost of accessing programs. One of Professor Halsey’s recommendations in the
IRRRRE final report says, “Ensure Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) children start school with a
strong foundation for learning.”
The Australian Government recognises the importance of ensuring children are not disadvantaged in
terms of their early physical, social and educational development. Researchers throughout the world
report that the social and developmental gap in children’s functioning and achievement can be
significant by age six. These differences in the cognitive, non-cognitive and social skills are strong
predictors of later academic, occupational and life achievement.
The delivery and accessibility of early learning programs for children in the year prior to starting
school has improved throughout Australia in recent years due to the introduction of the Federal
Government’s commitment to the Universal Access to Early Childhood Education Program. ICPA
members from all over Australia continue to present a large number of motions on this matter,
sending a clear message to those with the ability to make change: families in rural and remote
regions value early childhood learning. Rural families want and need access to affordable early
childhood learning and child care. ICPA (Aust) believes many issues could be addressed for families
living in rural and remote Australia by allowing greater flexibility within a number of policy areas to
cater for their needs.
ICPA (Aust) maintains that the impact of not being able to access affordable early learning for
children living beyond the metropolitan boundaries is evident in the gap between educational
outcomes for rural and remote students and their urban counterparts. A significant contributor to
this is likely due to learning difficulties going undiagnosed in the early years and having very limited
opportunities to socialise and interact with other children.
Early childhood education programs provide opportunities for early identification and intervention
for learning difficulties. Training of early childhood educators and access to specialist advice are
important factors in enabling the detection of potential specific education needs.

5.2 Early learning through distance education programs
All States and Territories offer early learning programs delivered by distance education and this is
the only avenue available for many families living in rural and remote areas. Families wanting to
access these programs are bearing the entire cost associated with administering, resourcing and
teaching the lessons. Across Australia, approximately 280 children access recognised 4-year-old
programs in their homes through distance education, which today includes a mixture of hands on
play-based learning and teacher-led structured lessons which involve using information technology
for communication.

www.icpa.com.au

23

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

As with every other early childhood program for four-year-olds, these distance education lessons are
designed to help children transition from home to school. The children need a designated learning
space in which to learn school behaviours, such as the ability to sit at a desk for enough time to
complete a task, to use the technology required for distance education, to appropriately interact
with their peers and teacher and to understand the formal concept of school.
It is vital that young children have opportunities to socialise face-to-face with other children of their
age. This often requires families to travel great distances to attend school functions which provide
an opportunity for the children to participate in group activities such as sport, practice of
conversation skills and socialisation with their peers. These functions are also valuable in providing
teachers and other professionals with both group and individual evaluation and diagnostic
opportunities.
Families undertaking these distance education programs are effectively blocked from any funding to
assist with meeting the costs of program delivery and accessing school functions. These students are
deemed ineligible for the Assistance for Isolated Children’s Scheme (AIC) Distance Education
Allowance as 4-year-olds taking part in these early learning programs are not recognised by the
Australian Government and no payment is available through the current Child Care Rebates (CCR) or
Child Care Benefits (CCB) as these children are still in their parents’ care.
ICPA recommends that the Assistance for Isolated Children’s (AIC) Distance Education allowance
be extended to include four-year-old students taking part in recognised distance education early
childhood learning programs. Further information can be found in the ICPA (Aust) Briefing paperAIC for 4-Year-Olds November 2016.
http://www.icpa.com.au/documents/download/1067/federal-current-lobbies/briefing-papersnovember-2016.pdf
ICPA (Aust) identifies this discrepancy seems to be seriously at odds with the Universal Access to
Early Childhood Education Program.

5.3 Early learning services in rural and remote locations
ICPA members continue to raise concerns regarding the universal access to early learning programs
not being met in rural and remote areas. Amongst the issues raised are that the participation target
is not being applied in these areas, disadvantage is not recognised and funding is not targeted.
Our organisation is deeply concerned that the participation targets are not being met in rural and
remote communities. Generally, our member base does not have access to child care centres or
preschools and are requesting that the Federal Government work collaboratively with all
jurisdictions to create practical access to early childhood education. Small rural and remote
townships must have greater flexibility when it comes to meeting National Quality Framework
(NQF), now the new National Quality Standard (from February 2018) requirements. States and
Territories should broadly align with the NQF in order to maintain quality programs and facilities, but
that should not be at the expense of a program being delivered at all. ICPA (Aust) appreciates that a
number of states have addressed this issue and deliver the 4-year-old programs in schools, however,
ICPA NSW and Qld have identified a number of remote towns which have no programs at all, despite
there being vacant facilities at schools. It is claimed this is due to not meeting the NQS requirements.
Small rural towns wanting to offer an early learning program, often struggle with accessing an early
childhood teacher to implement the program, especially if the program is only offered part-time.
Rural communities and ICPA members have put forward a recommendation that in instances where
an early year’s program exists but no early childhood qualified teacher can be sourced, a qualified
teacher or diploma-qualified educator be allowed to deliver early childhood programs.
www.icpa.com.au

24

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

ICPA (Aust) believes every rural and remote community should be supported in providing an early
childhood learning service for children in the year before commencing school. Geographical isolation
should be included as a category of disadvantage under the National Partnership Agreement for
early childhood education. As noted in the Productivity Commission’s Report into Childcare and Early
Childhood Learning http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/childcare our families are
experiencing the same lack of equitable access to quality early childhood programs as others in
disadvantaged groups.
ICPA members would also like to see a separate target, of at least 95%, established for access of
rural and remote children to preschool programs satisfying the Universal Access agreement, to
ensure that state governments focus on creating similar access regardless of geographic area. The
Australian
Bureau
of
Statistics
Preschool
Education
data
for
2016
http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/6DA742EC957DE0ADCA25786800152118?OpenDocu
ment indicates that of all the children in NSW regional and remote areas already accessing
preschool, only 65% do so for 15 or more hours per week, clearly well short of the national target.
In order to further assist with the introduction of early learning in isolated locations and ensure the
longevity of the programs, ICPA recommends that the Federal Government sets up a targeted
funding program to states and territories as a support for early childhood services. The lack of access
and funding for preschool programs for rural and remote children should be addressed through a
separate participation target with recognition of disadvantage and targeted funding.

5.4 Mobile early learning services
In recent times, government was made very aware of how vital Mobile Playgroups are to families
living in rural and remote areas, when it announced the demise of the Budget Based Funding (BBF).
As these services are not ‘child care’ services where the children are being cared for solely by the
service, there were serious concerns that these mobile services would not be eligible for
continuation of funding under the New Child Care Package and that these services would be lost to
families living in geographic isolation. For families who may live hundreds of kilometres from the
nearest small rural town (which often does not have a child care centre), assurance that mobile
services which provide early childhood learning and socialisation for these children would continue,
was well received. It was pleasing to learn that these services will continue to be supported under a
new funding model, although the exact funding model enabling the continuation of these services
has not been revealed.
ICPA (Aust) is adamant mobile playgroups provide an irreplaceable service to families of young
children in rural and remote areas. They provide opportunities for play-based learning, socialisation
and offer support, resources and comfort to new and isolated parents. Potential developmental
issues may be detected in these settings.

www.icpa.com.au

25

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

6.

Rural schools
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

Regional inequality in rural schools
Teacher incentives
Teacher preparedness and retention
Regional communities and rural schools
Limitations of rural/remote secondary schools

6.1 Regional inequality in rural schools
Regional inequalities in relation to rural schools arise from:
• the difficulty in attracting and retaining quality staff
• limited relief and release time for staff and burnout
• the difficulties associated with a multi-level classroom (for students and teachers)
• limited program offerings
• the cost of accessing extra-curricular activities (sport, cultural experiences).

6.2 Teacher incentives
Most states offer some form of incentives to encourage teachers to rural and remote locations, such
as the transfer points system, whereby points are gained in order to transfer to chosen locations.
The most effective initiatives in attracting and retaining top teachers seem to be those which
prepare teachers for living and working in rural areas and/or offer mentoring support Initiatives
which include:
Pre-service teacher incentive programs e.g. the Kelvin Grove Teacher Education Centre of
Excellence https://teach.qld.gov.au/get-supported/teces/kelvingrove-tece works closely with the
QLD University of Technology (QUT) to improve teacher preparation into Prep to Year 12 with
exposure to rural and remote placements.
Take the Lead (Qld) http://education.qld.gov.au/capability/take-the-lead.html is a leadership and
development program to develop the skills and capabilities of selected participants as high
performing school leaders. The program attracts and recruits high-performing teachers, associate
leaders and principals who aspire to higher level school leadership roles in rural or remote
locations in Queensland.
Teach.NSW Scholarships https://www.teach.nsw.edu.au/
“HSC students and university students currently enrolled in teacher education studies - get paid
while you study to become a primary or secondary teacher in a rural or remote NSW public
school!”
Remote Areas Incentive Scheme (RAIS) http://ppr.det.qld.gov.au/corp/hr/hr/Pages/RemoteArea-Incentives-Scheme-(RAIS).aspx in Qld for rural and remote teachers provides increased
funding dependent on the remoteness of the school as well as the cost of several flights in and
out of town.
Incentives to attract and retain other professionals e.g. psychologists, behavioural therapists and
speech therapists in rural and remote areas will enable continuity of specific learning programs and
take the pressure off teachers to develop management programs for students with specific needs.

www.icpa.com.au

26

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

6.3 Teacher preparedness and retention
Teacher quality matters. In fact, it could be considered the most important school-related factor
influencing student achievement. While academic requirements are important, we also need to
value different and multiple teacher characteristics particularly when teaching in small rural schools.
Professor Halsey in the IRRRRE report says, “Attracting and retaining school leaders for regional,
rural and remote schools, as with teachers, continues to be a major challenge for most education
systems.”
Teachers wishing to take on positions in rural and remote locations need to be better prepared
and supported.
All too often we hear of young inexperienced teachers taking on hard to fill positions in isolated
locations who are unprepared for rural living, isolation from family, friends and colleagues, and the
impact lack of educational services has on student outcomes. Training of graduate teachers for the
rural and remote experience and engagement in these communities is vital to ensure improved
recruitment and retention of teachers and to achieve the optimum learning outcomes for the
students. It is also important that these pre-service teachers/students are made aware of and are
able to easily access the assistance and incentives available to them when taking on positions in a
rural and remote location. Teachers who are provided with housing and basic services such as
internet service as an incentive to teach in a rural area, need to be offered at a minimum, adequate
facilities/services.
Specific learning needs and disabilities
Teachers will encounter situations where a proportion of their class/es have specific learning needs
or disabilities. Neglecting to equip teachers, in already challenging circumstances, with knowledge of
specific needs education is to set them up for failure and will contribute to poor teacher retention
rates. In 2016, Minister Birmingham said, “The federal government had forced universities to start
training all student teachers to ‘engage and teach’ students with a disability.” ICPA (Aust) welcomes
this announcement and encourage universities to ensure their student teachers are trained
appropriately.
Teacher and Principal burnout is a factor contributing to poor retention rates in small schools.
Supportive group or cluster school structures can reduce the administrative burdens of small school
staff and provide the services of supportive specialist senior teachers. Timely and appropriate access
to other specialists such as speech pathologists and psychologists will further support rural and
remote teachers in diagnosing and managing specific needs students.
Retention of experienced teachers living in rural and remote communities
Retention of teachers in rural and remote areas is influenced by the very nature of the communities
they reside in. When residing in such communities, teachers are faced with the unique situation of
having to interact daily with students and families both on a professional and personal level. This can
raise some difficulties for teachers with regards to code of conduct, privacy, conflicts and other
issues. Teachers in rural and remote schools need to be supported to deal with the issues which can
arise in these situations.
More than a few ‘top teachers’ reside in rural and remote communities and due to family or
business commitments may not be able to teach full-time. The community and students have been
served well by such teachers and they are often in a position to continue to provide relief and
release teaching hours on a casual basis and to mentor new or young teachers. Commonly however,
these teachers are forced to let their Teacher Registration lapse because of the onerous
requirements of education departments. Students and the incumbent teachers requiring relief and

www.icpa.com.au

27

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

release time are the big losers and their retention in areas where relief teachers are difficult to find
is further diminished.
In order to ensure teachers are well prepared for teaching in isolated locations, ICPA (Aust)
believes education providers who offer teacher education courses, should implement a major in
Rural and Remote Education and modules on teaching Specific Learning Needs such as Autistic
Spectrum Disorders and Dyslexia.
The course could cover a range of unique challenges requiring specific knowledge, understanding
and skills relevant to rural and remote areas. Topics included are those that are unique to teaching
positions in an isolated area, including multi-age classrooms, multi-age curriculum tools, web
conferencing, online learning tools, and strategies for coping with the unique dynamics that exist in
small rural and remote communities and schools. As an adjunct to this major, it is envisaged that
students would complete rural and remote practicums ensuring graduate teachers would start their
career job ready and have invaluable insight into the structure, practice and delivery methods of
rural and remote education.
More opportunities for teachers living in or near rural communities so they can maintain their
teaching skills
Teachers who may not be teaching full-time due to business or family commitments should have
simplified pathways for them to be able to maintain their Teacher Registration. Due to living in small
rural communities, they are not able to meet requirements due to ‘recency of practice’ for programs
such as ‘Return to Teaching’ because of the limited access hours available. A small school may only
have a few opportunities available a year to offer for teaching hours but there may be several
people with teaching qualifications in the area trying to access these hours to maintain their
teaching eligibility. These community members are essential for relief teaching as well as potentially
more permanent positions in the future when they may again be able to teach on a more regular
basis.
Specific needs and learning disabilities requires an appropriate level of skill, support and
knowledge which would be enhanced with improved teacher education.
The delivery of modules in Specific Needs Education would build the teacher’s capacity to identify
and assist children with special needs or learning difficulties. It would provide beneficial outcomes
for all students by assisting with early recognition, identification, assessment and the
implementation of specific learning needs education. Support and resources to identify and cater for
specific learning needs such as dyslexia will assist rural and remote teachers to cope.

Clusters
The
Outback
Advantage
and
Literacy
program
in
Qld
http://education.qld.gov.au/staff/development/ideas/journeys/outbackadv.html started as a
network of nine one-teacher schools, which worked together through IDEAS (a Research-based
Framework for Enhancing School Outcomes in Qld) and with the Staff College to enhance the quality
and sustainability of initiatives in their rural and remote schools. They now have an alliance of 13
one and two teacher schools that have created an active, supportive and challenging network.
Cluster school initiatives like these, help to support and strengthen ties between one and two
teacher rural and remote schools and are an example for other rural and remote communities.
Similarly, in the NT, ‘Group Schools’ provided a supportive structure and connections between staff
in small schools. Unfortunately, some of the supportive group school structures were dismantled
several years ago.

www.icpa.com.au

28

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

6.4 Regional communities and rural schools
Rural schools are part of the fabric of a rural community. The presence and quality of a rural school
determines whether families are attracted to come and stay in a rural community. Physically, the
school often provide a community resource and venue and are often emergency evacuation points
as well. Rural schools provide employment in struggling communities and teachers are often valued
and highly contributing members of small communities.
ICPA (Aust) often hears of new and innovative programs being conducted to improve the connection
between schools and the broader community. These connections are valuable particularly for high
school students when considering career opportunities. Programs that offer connections and
mentoring through universities and local businesses who offer traineeships and apprenticeships are
highly valued in exposing students to new career options.
When considering career pathways, a platform to share information across state borders about
successful programs designed for rural and remote students would be beneficial.
Motivation of rural and remote students to succeed and how they can be supported to realise
their aspirations
Students bring individual motivational characteristics to the classroom including self-perceptions
that influence their school success, multiple goal orientations and different types and degrees of
motivation. These characteristics are influenced by past and present achievement, along with
feedback from teachers, family and peers. The motivations that students develop at home and in
school influence their future goals, expectations and intentions. Rural and remote students are often
motivated by a sense of helping community and recognising a need for a solution in a particular
area. They are often influenced by their own life experiences.
Rural and remote students who attend small high schools or board away from home could be
better supported by considering their cultural background and where they live. All too often
students (particularly boys) with rural backgrounds are stereotyped and not motivated by teachers
and peers to aspire to careers outside the family farm once they leave school. These students should
be offered tailored support as they approach decisions regarding further study or career paths. In
many cases boarding schools will only have a small cohort of boarders who live remotely, special
consideration and support needs to be given to their aspirations. They need outside school support
to follow and act on these goals.
Students in rural high schools need to be supported in following their career path. Rural high
school students who wish to sit exams for university entry (or other exams such as the Under
Graduate Medicine and Health Sciences Admissions Test UMAT) can feel alienated and it can be
difficult for students to then continue on this path, if not well-supported by the school. Conversely,
a student who wishes to do a traineeship or follow a vocational path, can feel out-of-place if
surrounded by those who are pursuing the university pathway. Rural and remote families have very
little opportunity to discuss or gather information about various future pathways and this makes it
difficult for them to support their students and assist with their decisions.
Financial concerns also play a large role in determining whether or not rural and remote students
will pursue their aspirations. At the 2017 ICPA Federal Conference, ICPA members supported a
motion asking for the production of a document containing all the information associated with
eligibility and entitlements for rural students for secondary and tertiary education, including
apprenticeships and traineeships, to be provided to all rural high schools and final year primary
students. A document such as this would be beneficial in providing information to rural and remote

www.icpa.com.au

29

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

students and their families so that they are aware of what financial assistance is available as they
discuss and try to assist their children with decisions about their future.
Along with financial issues, the requirement to relocate to larger centres also has a significant impact
on rural and remote students pursuing their aspirations, both at a secondary and tertiary level. The
impact on a student who has to leave their family unit as well as their local community for
educational purposes is significant. Emphasis on supporting students in these transitions, or more
opportunity to be made to pursue aspirations at a local level is essential.
Relationships between communities and schools and the (discontinued) Country Areas Program
funding
The close and essential relationship between community and schools could be enhanced and utilised
more effectively to enrich students’ learning experiences. The Country Areas Program (CAP) was
targeted federal funding directed towards assisting rural and remote schools and their communities
to enhance the learning outcomes and educational opportunities for students in geographically
isolated areas. Schools and their community worked closely together to develop CAP-funded
projects. CAP funding was available for projects either run by community members or schools
themselves which supported:
•
•
•
•

Curriculum Enhancement
Information and Communications Technology
Professional Development
School Support

CAP projects were highly valued by students, schools and communities. These projects enabled
students to participate in many learning experiences that they otherwise would not have been able
to access e.g. Canberra trips. In an adjustment of school funding policy, CAP funding is no longer
targeted, but rather given to states to administer as they deem necessary. This has eroded the
relationship between community and schools in some areas as community members are now often
excluded from the decisions around school projects and many valuable CAP projects no longer take
place.

6.5 Limitations of rural and remote secondary schools
Low enrolments and access pathways
While small secondary schools provide an important opportunity for schooling for those who attend
them, they will rarely meet the needs of all students living in that area. Education is a much broader
issue than just basic academic subjects. It encompasses life skills, cultural experiences, sporting
opportunities and exposure to experiences beyond those available in a local environment. Most of
these cannot be accessed by extension programs via video-conferencing or virtual classrooms. Some
students will need an environment which offers more challenges or greater opportunities in order to
develop a sense of self-worth and confidence in choosing career pathway; vital ingredients for young
people in an ever-changing and challenging world in general and particularly in rural and remote
Australia.
It is in the national interest to ensure isolated children are not disadvantaged in terms of educational
and social development and to make sure their educational outcomes are not compromised. These
students need the opportunity to attend a school that is commensurate to their needs allowing
them to realise their educational potential and presenting a pathway which provides educational
parity with their urban peers. It is imperative for rural and remote families to be able to provide an
education for their children while continuing to reside and work in rural and remote regions.

www.icpa.com.au

30

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

A small number of families are not eligible to receive the AIC Boarding Allowance for their children
due to living in or near small communities with a small state secondary school. These high schools
are considered by state education departments as providing an appropriate education and not
eligible to be bypassed.
Families unable to access financial assistance or relocate the whole family for secondary education,
are resorting to extreme measures. It is concerning to our organisation that families are separating,
with the mother and children moving to larger towns to access education. Members have indicated
that the main reason for making this decision is to reduce the cost of boarding. Other factors include
social, learning difficulties and emotional/mental health issues.
In the discussion paper for the Reform of Federation White Paper Roles and Responsibilities in
Education http://www.icpa.com.au/documents/download/1018/federal-submissions-1/submissiondiscussion-of-education-issues-reform-of-federation-white-paper-2015.pdf ICPA (Aust) outlined
concerns regarding the impact on communities when programs that focus on specific vulnerable
cohorts are introduced in order to address the needs of communities with high indigenous
populations.
Although most of the work for vulnerable cohorts is done in partnership between the States and
Territories and Commonwealth, there have been instances where national policies and agreements
are perceived as being too prescriptive to genuinely complement activity by the States or Territories
or have adopted a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach, rather than allow for jurisdictional differences.
Similarly, while States and Territories are responsible for schooling, the Commonwealth is responsible
for employment and welfare programs, higher education and national job markets. This disconnect
between governments lead to different programs being developed by different levels of government
that focus on only one part of the student experience.
Unfortunately, the impact that these programs have on community members who are not
considered vulnerable are not being considered and the question needs to be asked, “How will this
intervention impact the education of all students in the community?”

www.icpa.com.au

31

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

7.

Specific Education Needs
7.1 Regional inequality for specific education needs
7.2 Access to specialists
7.3 Teacher training

7.1 Regional inequality for specific education needs
Sometimes geographically isolated people with disabilities are referred as having a double disability;
that of the disability and that of being isolated from services. The same could be said for children
with specific learning needs in regional Australia. Access to services required for timely diagnosis,
early intervention and management of specific needs is abysmal in much of regional Australia.

Improving Access - Specific Education Needs
The diagnosis and treatment or management of specific education needs of rural and remote
students falls short of parent and even teacher expectations. One of the contributing factors is
access to professionals qualified to make assessments and recommendations. Families of students
with special needs often meet serious barriers because their problems span both education and
health systems. In many instances, neither the education nor the health system offers assistance
with the travel and accommodation costs or professional fees associated with the diagnosis of a
learning difficulty. YET without a diagnosis, resources cannot be allocated to supporting the student.
Timely and affordable access to doctors, specialist medicos, speech pathologists, ophthalmologists,
psychologists etc. is always problematic for rural and remote families. Strong links between
education and health sectors are vital for the best outcomes for students.
Frustrated ICPA members across Australia have provided ICPA (Aust) with many proposals to
improve access to a high-quality education for students with specific education needs and their
families:
•
•

•

•

•

•
•

Early identification and intervention for learning difficulties
Distance education and small schools’ teachers to be trained in recognising and catering
for specific learning needs such as dyslexia and that distance education supervisors be
provided with information and support (refer to Teachers and Teaching Section).
Universities that provide teacher training should include modules such as Autistic
Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) in their curriculum. With the alarming rate of increase in the
diagnosis of ASD, a newly graduated teacher is likely to have a student with ASD in their
class. Knowing how to manage this condition with an appropriate level of skills and
knowledge in behaviour management strategies for ASD would provide beneficial outcomes
for the whole class. This training could reduce teacher burnout and increase retention of
teachers in rural and remote areas, as well as having obvious benefits to the student/s.
Workshops and seminars to assist students, families and teachers of children with specific
learning needs including for gifted children. Online delivery and improving communications
may facilitate the delivery of workshops and seminars.
In 2015/16 the government agreed or agreed in principle to nearly all of the
recommendations of the National Dyslexia Working Group. ICPA (Aust) requests in
implementing these recommendations provisions be made specifically for the student
studying by distance education.
Ensure current funding models provide adequate funding for students with disabilities in
boarding schools, distance education and rural and remote schools. Sometimes having a
disability in a remote area is referred to as having a ‘double disability’.
Specialist services – regular and timely access to special needs teachers and therapists is
paramount. This could take the form of mobile teams of specialists and therapists. Online
appointments have been proven to be appropriate in some instances such as mental health
www.icpa.com.au

32

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

•
•

•

•

•

consultations and speech pathology. In some instances, the establishment of specific
learning needs centres might be viable, such as Kintore St School in Katherine NT. Should
specific learning needs centres be available then due consideration must also be given to
accommodation for those accessing such centres. Adequate funding/resourcing for specialist
services for both school and home-based therapy programs is necessary for their success.
Provision of incentives to attract and retain qualified professionals and specialised
teachers to rural and remote areas to enable continuity of specific learning needs programs.
The cooperation of ALL relevant agencies (government, private and voluntary) is required.
These students fall into the gap between education and health departments. For example, in
the NT, a family with a child exhibiting a learning difficulty will not receive any assistance
from the education department to travel to see a professional for assessment and diagnosis.
Nor will they receive any assistance from the health department, even though they may be
consulting a health professional, because the student’s condition is not perceived as a
medical problem.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) adds a new dimension to the specific
education needs field, however there are still some very grey areas and under-resourcing
is still likely to affect access to an appropriate education for rural and remote students.
NDIS needs to cover reasonable travel and accommodation costs for geographically isolated
families. Some participants in the Scheme may be attending school and require additional
support as a result of their disability. The Scheme will fund supports that enable participants
to attend school education such as: assistance with self-care at school, specialist transport,
transportable equipment and specialised or intensive support to transition between schools,
or from school to post-school options. The education system has a responsibility to provide
the staff and resources necessary for education per se. The NDIS participant’s plan will
include the supports the Scheme will fund for participants and those supports which are the
responsibility of the education system. As AIC is also designed to support students to attend
school education, in regional areas there may be some interaction between AIC entitlements
and NDIS supports.
Telehealth services are offering exciting opportunities for delivering services to rural and
remote students. Such services include speech pathology, mental health consultations,
occupational therapy intervention to aid fine motor skill development and even capacity
building to support educators and parents dealing with children experiencing difficulties.
Royal Far West and University of NSW are partnering to research the use of telehealth to
provide intervention for children with behavioural and emotional difficulties. On the
downside, the extent and advancement of service networks, internet capabilities in the bush
and the Medicare system combine to create a lag in the widespread availability, accessibility
and adoption of these technologies.
Medicare rebates – From 1 Nov 2017, Rural and regional Australians can now claim a
Medicare rebate for online videoconferencing consultations with psychologists, other
mental health professionals and occupational therapists. This initiative will hopefully provide
a precedent for other telehealth services where there is clear evidence of its effectiveness.
At present, no rebate exists for Speech Language Pathology (SLP) via Telehealth delivery.
However, research into one-on-one sessions for Allied Health appointments via Telehealth
suggests it is as effective as face-to-face sessions. Parents can claim about $52 per session
for 5 sessions a year for face-to-face consultations, but no rebate exists for telehealth
sessions. As Telehealth web conferencing is growing exponentially as a recognised mode of
delivery, especially for rural and remote students, a Medicare rebate must be assigned to
more Telehealth appointments as a matter of urgency.

Diagnosis and management of specific education needs of rural and remote students. Schools and
teachers need a tremendous amount of support from families and the health and education systems
www.icpa.com.au

33

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

to best manage students with specific education needs or disabilities. Ideally, having professionals
who can straddle the health and education departments would assist teachers and families to
navigate the process from early assessments through to diagnosis and interventions.
Specific needs and learning disabilities requires an appropriate level of skill, support and
knowledge which would be enhanced with improved teacher education. The delivery of modules in
Specific Needs Education would build the teacher’s capacity to identify and assist children with
special needs or learning difficulties. It would provide beneficial outcomes for all students by
assisting with early recognition, identification, assessment and the implementation of specific
learning needs education. Support and resources to identify and cater for specific learning needs
such as dyslexia will assist rural and remote teachers to cope.
ICPA members have highlighted the need for student and parent workshops for gifted students.
The Minister for Education and Training was contacted regarding this proposal last year and he
responded saying that the matter should be raised in this review. The Gifted Education Research,
Resource and Information Centre (GERRIC) at the University of New South Wales has been contacted
by ICPA (Aust) regarding the potential for delivering workshops. Workshops such as those delivered
by GERRIC 10 years ago were enormously useful in enabling both parents and remote staff to
support gifted students emotionally, socially and academically. Indications from GERRIC are that our
request is in keeping with their policy position. ICPA (Aust) would like to see this proposal introduced
as soon as possible. Options for working with the University of New England School of Education are
also being explored.

www.icpa.com.au

34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

8. Tertiary and Training
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4

Regional inequality in tertiary education
Allowances and accommodation
Training
Regional communities and further education

8.1 Regional inequality in tertiary education and training
Engaging in tertiary education at an institution of choice, should be an option for all Australian
students who have the ability, ambition, motivation and desire to pursue their goals regardless of
their socio-economic status or geographic location. Ability to access education is one of the key
considerations in determining whether a student can take up this option. The single greatest barrier
to rural students’ access to tertiary education is cost. Rural and remote students continue to be
under-represented at tertiary level and face many barriers to accessing tertiary education including
costs of relocation, tuition and living expenses, socio-economic status, distance from tertiary
education institutions and preparedness.
Financial assistance is imperative to increase the engagement of rural and remote students in
tertiary education. Some families are educating younger siblings at boarding schools as their older
children enter higher education, exacerbating financial pressures. A family’s ability to financially
support their adult children while studying can be beyond their means.
Our members strongly voice that it is the high cost of accessing university that has the greatest
impact on their ability to attend university. The findings outlined in a research report, Tertiary Access
Research, May 2013, conducted by ICPA (Aust), clearly supports this.
https://www.icpa.com.au/page/attachment/85/tertiary-research-2013
Students isolated from tertiary education due to location, must be recognised as a separate
disadvantage group when assessing for Youth Allowance to address the distinctly unique
requirements of rural and remote students. Those students, who must relocate to access a tertiary
education should be able to access income support in their own right and must be considered
independent of their parents for the purpose of accessing financial assistance once they commence
their tertiary studies.

8.2 Allowances and tertiary education
Youth Allowance, both dependent and independent provides financial assistance for many rural
and remote students to access a tertiary education. ICPA (Aust) has welcomed the changes to
dependent Youth Allowance eligibility criteria (removal of the Family Assets Test and the Family
Actual Means Test and the changes to the Family Pool) in 2015 and further changes would ensure
equity of access for rural and remote students.
Independent Youth Allowance – the Parental Income Test MUST BE removed from eligibility criteria
for rural and remote students qualifying under the workforce participation criteria as it does not
recognise that the student has proved their independence from their parents, does not take into
account all siblings of the applicant, being supported at primary, secondary, or tertiary levels (Family
Pool) and is not indexed. ICPA (Aust) has welcomed the reduction of time, 18 months to 14 months
rural and remote students need to be employed under the self-supporting criteria to qualify for
independent Youth Allowance.
Tertiary Access Allowance
The introduction of the Relocation Scholarships was an acknowledgement by the Government that
relocation has an associated cost and can pose a real barrier when accessing higher education.
www.icpa.com.au

35

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Currently it is only available for recipients of dependent Youth Allowance yet does not adequately
recognise the additional costs incurred by all rural and remote students having to relocate each year
to access higher education. The high up-front set-up and ongoing costs associated with relocation:
travel, securing accommodation set-up costs (rental housing bond, electricity connection or
residential college fees), living expenses and communication (telephone, internet) along with the
rising costs of basic living commodities, are all impacting on rural and remote student access. Some
of these costs are borne not only in the first year of a student’s course but are recurrent over the
duration of their tertiary education.
Despite recent changes to the Youth Allowance criteria, designed to assist rural and remote
students, ICPA will continue to advocate for the introduction of a Tertiary Access Allowance, equal to
the Relocation Scholarship for those rural and remote students who must relocate and live away
from home to access a tertiary education and not be contingent on the receipt of dependent Youth
Allowance.
Online Tertiary Education
There are numerous benefits for school leavers studying online from home, such as affordability,
choice, ease of access, the potential to speed up learning and allow students to enter the workforce
more rapidly and the ability to better balance work and family demands due to flexibility in course
delivery options. For certain students, some or all of these elements may be beneficial as they
undertake their tertiary study, however online tertiary education is not appropriate for everyone or
every course and it is important that online learning is seen as an option for students and not a
replacement for face-to-face, on-campus attendance. The opportunity to partake in campus social,
sporting cultural and academic life is seen by many students as a vital component of tertiary study
and contact with both academics and peers are a critical element of both relationship building and
personal development. These factors can be seen as even more important when considering rural
and remote students who may have spent their entire formal education in a one teacher school or
home classroom. Studying online is reliant on efficient, effective and affordable internet services.
ICPA (Aust) supports the expansion of regional learning hubs to assist in online learning. However, it
is critically important that online learning remains as an option for rural and remote students and
not a replacement for face-to-face, on-campus learning.
Transitioning to Tertiary Education
Information on Post-Compulsory pathways is imperative to allow rural and remote students to make
informed decisions about courses available, course delivery options, institutions to apply to,
entrance requirements, alternative entrance options (early entry, school recommendations and
scholarship entry), application processes, course costs, accommodation options, campus facilities
and support available.
Information must be delivered in different modes (phone, on-line, face-to-face or through schools,
teachers or career advisers) to cater for rural and remote students. Many of these rural and remote
students cannot attend open days or have poor internet capacity limiting their options for virtual
tours and web conferencing, to gain course information or assistance with applications. Having
‘student mentors’ that prospective students can access to enquire about how courses operate and
the university itself can be very helpful. A national platform for all information will ensure
consistency.
ICPA (Aust) welcomes the recommendations of the Transparency of Higher Education Admissions
Processes, including the national approach to managing applications resulting in the simplification of
students’ applications to their chosen tertiary institution, especially if applying interstate and looks
forward to the timely implementation of all the recommendations. Many rural and remote students
www.icpa.com.au

36

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

planning on a tertiary education, by nature of where they live, do not necessarily go to an institution
in their home state.
Isolation brings communication issues, so it is important to have an appropriate and effective range
of communication options. For boarding students, this information needs to be accessible to both
parents and students to facilitate parents to assist their children with both understanding the
information and decision making. This would also ensure consistency of information.
ICPA (Aust) was very grateful for the introduction of Rural and Regional Enterprise Scholarships to
improve access to educational opportunities for regional, rural and remote students, announced as
part of the Election Commitment in June 2016.
Accommodation and tertiary education
The college environment is the accommodation of choice for many rural and remote students and
for some, it is their only option. College accommodation provides an educational, pastoral and social
support network which many rural and remote students seek.
Accessing a tertiary education for many students from rural and remote Australia involves relocating
away from the family home and travelling to a major centre. For these students, leaving home,
beginning university and also trying to find accommodation just prior to the university
commencement date can be competitive, stressful, time consuming and costly. The uncertainty of
not having secured residential places at college and the anxious wait for confirmation until just
before university courses begin makes the planning process more difficult and if unsuccessful
students then have to search for private rental accommodation off campus which is at a premium.
The necessity to find alternative accommodation has resulted in students deferring, not pursuing
their courses or withdrawing and this has contributed to the lower participation at tertiary level of
rural and remote students compared to their metropolitan counterparts. The Department of
Education and Training have recently conducted a Regional Student Accommodation Analysis:
https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/regional_student_accommodation_analysis_r
eport_final.pdf
We appreciate that many university colleges do acknowledge the difficulty that rural and remote
students face when relocating to university and some do offer early entry and allocated places for
these students once they have acceptance of their university course place.
ICPA (Aust) has continued to ask colleges to either consider the introduction of an early entry
scheme for rural and remote students by offering early confirmation or allocate a higher distribution
of residential accommodation places to rural and remote students, to ensure they have a place in a
metropolitan residential college when a university course place is offered.

8.3 Training
Engaging in vocational education and training (VET) sector should be an option for all young
Australians to pursue who have the ability and desire to succeed in apprenticeship or training
vocation, regardless of their socio-economic status or geographic location. However, for many
students living in rural and remote areas it is proving difficult to undertake training opportunities
due to their inability to meet relocation, tuition and living expenses.
Rural and remote apprentices and VET students experience significant disadvantage in their efforts
to pursue their chosen courses.

www.icpa.com.au

37

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

•
•

•

•

•
•

Relocation - As with tertiary students, it is necessary for the majority of these students to
relocate to larger centres to access training centres and businesses with the capacity to train
them, incurring high costs.
Course practicums - Many of these apprentices have further costs when attending course
placements, as a consequence the cost of travel and additional accommodation are a
significant impost and often impossible to fund without outside help from employers or
family. Recognition needs to be made that rural and remote students may need to relocate
to short-term accommodation while attending training institutions and/or compulsory
practicums away from their usual residence.
Additional expenses - While VET Student Loan is useful paying the upfront course costs, it
does not assist with living expenses or with the costs of accessing the courses. Recognition
needs to be made that rural and remote students may need to relocate and source
accommodation while attending training institutions away from home. Access costs are
typically a major deterrent to rural and remote students participating in the VET system at
the same rate as their metropolitan peers who can often live at home while attending
training colleges/centres, at much lower living costs than for rural students who need to
move away from home in order to participate in a training course.
VET students are unable to access the Relocation Scholarship. Youth Allowance (YA) is
accessible as long as it is a fulltime course and they meet the independent or dependent
criteria.
Providers – Ongoing regulation of the VET/apprenticeship providers is welcomed.
Rural and remote students who often live great distances from training centres and have
poor internet and communication services, need access to various means of delivery. A
variety of communication means need to be employed to support our rural and remote
students.
o By way of example: A remote-living Cert IV Vet Nursing student has enrolled in an
online course; completing much of the theory online (with unreliable internet) whilst
being employed by her parents. Being too far from town for the usual urban one
day/week work placement to be practical, she has to relocate to a town for 3
months to complete the UNPAID work placement requirements of the course. The
course was classified as part-time, so she was ineligible for Youth Allowance. She
had no assistance with relocation and living costs and could do little paid work
because of time required to complete both the theory and practical components of
the course.

8.4 Regional communities and further education
Affordable access to training is vital to building sustainable rural and remote communities.
Potentially, many VET students will return to rural areas post-training, bringing back skills to the
community and help to strengthen their communities. This in turn assists in further attracting and
retaining residents, thereby boosting the economic and social sustainability of these communities.
The following points must be considered in order to support students who relocated for training:
• The needs of VET students living in rural and remote locations differ considerably to those
living in urban areas and recognition of these needs through separate targeted funding is
vital
• Financial assistance to re-locate to access their chosen apprenticeship which does not have
to be re-paid unlike the Trade Support Loan
• Financial assistance with re-location for short-term compulsory practicums of approved
courses
• Strategically placed regional hubs be available for online learning/support as communication
is a major problem in many areas
www.icpa.com.au

38

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

•
•

VET students studying approved courses able to access the Relocation Scholarship
Financial assistance with attracting suitable, qualified staff to rural and remote areas
enabling students to engage with educators with skills relevant to courses studied.

Directional flow
For students living in rural and remote locations there will most likely always be a need to relocate in
order to access further study or training due to limited universities, training centres and
opportunities where they live. Whether students relocate to a regional centre or a city, a cost to
relocate is involved. The chosen study location often comes down to course availability and being
accepted into their chosen course. As discussed earlier with advancing communication services,
learning online may become another option available to rural and remote students but one that
shouldn’t be seen as meeting all students’ educational needs.
Further Regional Study Hubs, which were announced in the 2017-2018 Federal Budget, will also
assist some students to remain in regional areas in order to access higher education. These eight
Regional Study Hubs (six new Hubs as well as the two already in existence) are designed provide the
infrastructure and study support necessary to support regional students to study courses locally,
delivered by distance online from any Australian university. However, it must be remembered that
most students who live in rural and remote areas would still be required to relocate considerable
distances even if they chose to study at a Regional Study Hub or Regional University.
The focus should be NOT on ensuring rural students do not move to the city, but rather on attracting
students, regardless of whether they are from a rural or urban background, to locate to rural and
remote areas with their skills on completion of their studies. Rural, remote and regional students
should not feel locked in to only being able to study at the regional level and not being allowed to
access higher educational opportunity in larger centres. Even if a completely comparable experience
could be offered at the regional level, rural students should still be afforded the same choice as their
city counterparts of studying where it best suits their need. The main focus should be on attracting
graduates from all backgrounds to rural and remote areas by offering certainty of sustainable,
vibrant communities, gainful employment and an opportunity to be valued for the skills they can
provide.

www.icpa.com.au

39

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

9. Miscellaneous
9.1 The Education Index is consistently higher than the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Education-related allowances, if they increase at all, typically increase with CPI.
9.2 A National Rural Education Alliance, led by a Commissioner, would enable
education of students of rural, remote and regional Australia to be at the forefront
of government policy considerations. Inequalities in regional education could be
more effectively addressed and a collaborative approach to finding solutions would
ultimately equalise educational outcomes for children in the bush. Rural and remote
education must be placed on a separate register when delivering and funding
education for rural and remote students.
9.3 Roads in regional Australia are often in a poor state of repair and even dangerous.
Physical access to and from towns and departure points can seriously affect the
ability of families to access education, and the ability of educators to access regional
students.
9.4 Regional Airfares have been the subject of a recent Inquiry into Regional Airfares.
ICPA (Aust) made a detailed submission and attended a Public Hearing pertaining to
the Inquiry.
https://www.icpa.com.au/documents/download/1118/federal-submissions1/regional-air-fare-inquiry-submission-feb-2018.pdf The cost of travel to and from
boarding schools, tertiary education and training placements can be astronomical.
Geographically isolated families also require air travel at times to access specialist
help for learning needs.
9.5 A Coalition election commitment of $44.7M is yet to be allocated. ICPA (Aust) has
provided costed ideas on how this funding could best assist the isolated students
and families it was dedicated to/directed at.
9.6 Rural/urban drift

9.1 Education Index and CPI
The Education Index is consistently and significantly higher than the All Groups CPI. Educationrelated allowances, if they increase at all, typically increase with CPI. For example, in the 12 months
to September 2017, the All Groups CPI was 1.8 and the Education Index for the same period was 3.1.
The Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Allowances, Basic Boarding and Second Home Allowance,
must be increased significantly and the annual increase aligned with the CPI education sub-index.
CPI-based increases in education allowances will inevitably lead to the observed divergence between
allowances and costs, as described in Section 1.1.
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/allprimarymainfeatures/1B0B340B7B402978CA258225
000D6CFD?opendocument

9.2 National Rural and Remote Education Alliance
ICPA (Aust) is calling for rural and remote education to be placed on a separate register when
delivering and funding education for rural and remote students. ICPA (Aust) believes a National Rural
Education Alliance, which would bring together all interested national organisations, led by a
Commissioner, would ensure the focus remains on educating students living in rural and remote
Australia.
In 2016 ICPA (Aust) raised the idea of a new alliance focused on rural education with the Minister for
Education and Training. Minister Birmingham was supportive of the idea and has suggested that the
concept of a National Rural and Remote Education Alliance, similar to the National Rural Health
Alliance, be raised during the Independent Regional, Rural and Remote Education Review.
www.icpa.com.au

40

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

The National Rural Health Alliance, has proved to be a very beneficial vehicle for promoting
understanding of the health needs of people living in rural and remote areas. Similarly, many
national organisations in this country have a keen interest in and a passion for rural and remote
education. By forming an alliance these groups will have a common platform to discuss common
concerns, share the results of studies, research and coalface knowledge, and inform political policy
and decision making. Ultimately, rural and remote students’ learning outcomes can only improve as
a result of the proposed collaborative approach which will streamline the current piecemeal
approach to rural and remote education.
ICPA (Aust) envisages the following points as key areas of responsibility for the Alliance:
• to identify priority needs in rural and remote education and to promote appropriate action
• to research key issues in rural and remote education and develop knowledge about them
• to disseminate relevant information and knowledge to those with an interest in rural and
remote education
• to provide feedback to governments on the effect on education of legislation, policies and
services in rural and remote communities
• to encourage prominent organisations and urban groups to recognise and support students
who are vulnerable by virtue of their geodemographic profile.
• to develop strategic alliances with other groups that have the potential to improve rural and
remote education outcomes, and
• to undertake resourced project and contract work that supports the vision of the Alliance.
Professor John Halsey on page 77 of his Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote
Education Report recommended that the government "Establish a national focus for RRR education,
training and research to enhance access, outcomes and opportunities in regional Australia." ICPA
feels that a National Rural Education Alliance could help fulfil this recommendation.

9.3 Roads
Some roads in rural and remote Australia are federally funded, particularly in the NT. The appalling
condition and deterioration of remote roads has become a major concern for remote residents that
have no choice but to travel on roads that are clearly not safe and are indeed impassable for weeks
at a time.
Roads are vital and play an integral part of the safe delivery of students to face to face functions,
correspondence materials delivery and the safe passage of Distance Education Staff to students’
home visits and for all Department of Education and Community Services staff visiting communities
as well as health workers and child care services.
Government has to urgently commit to a long-term maintenance strategy with adequate funding to
bring these roads back to all weather and safe trafficable surface. Families and teaching staff have
no option other than travelling on roads with extremely undesirable driving conditions which not
only affects a safe lifestyle but is also having a detrimental effect on education, and the business
operations which sustain the lives of those in the bush.

9.4 Regional airfares
Due to geographic isolation, many rural and remote families need to travel large distances in order
to access not only education and learning experiences, but also specialist assistance. Families also
need to travel at times to support their students who can be attending schooling hundreds if not
thousands of kilometres away. The availability of Air Travel in regional areas allows families to cover
the distance necessary to travel to get to schooling or specialist services (such as speech language
www.icpa.com.au

41

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

pathologists) much more quickly and directly, however this travel often comes at a huge cost. In
addition, many families have to drive significant distances just to get to a regional airport before
they begin their journey by air.
Air travel also offers the chance to access learning experiences that are not available in the regions
where many of these students live, school excursions and camps for example.
People also travel into regional areas such as specialist coaches, music teachers, artists and many
others to work with children who live outside of city centres at various times of the year. The cost of
bringing in these people with specialised skills can be very difficult to meet for rural and regional
schools and school communities.
ICPA is not aware of any “Student Concession” fares available for air travel. Bus services and railways
often offer student concession fares to make student travel less expensive, but not airlines. Airlines
also tend to have higher airfares for school holiday times, which are the times that many students
who live in rural and remote areas need to travel to and from their place of schooling to their home.
Furthermore, there are inequities in Commonwealth Student Travel Allowances. While the Federal
Government has in place Fares Allowances to assist with student travel under the ABSTUDY and
Youth Allowance Schemes, there is no provision for travel in the Assistance for Isolated Children
Scheme which is the assistance a large number of geographically isolated children fall under.
ICPA (Aust) recommends:
• Governments consider further subsidisation of rural/remote/regional routes that show a
demonstrated need
• National student concessions be available for air travel
• Airlines retain a number of seats at “normal” pricing for a certain block of dates leading up
to School terms beginning and ending.
• Commonwealth Fares Allowances to be more uniform across assistance programs
• Airlines should be encouraged to work together for the benefit of customers in forming
partnerships and make connecting to destinations more seamless.
• Programs such as the Remote Air Services Subsidy Scheme RASS are supported, and
expansion provided for.

9.5 Coalition’s Election Commitment for Regional, Rural and Remote Students 2016
In the lead up to the 2016 federal election, the former Deputy Prime Minister, the Honorable
Barnaby Joyce, announced on 22 June 2016 during a televised session at the National Press Club that
the Coalition would commit to among other things, “$44.7 million towards isolated children, which
includes an increase of 50 per cent to the Assistance for Isolated Children’s (AIC) Additional Boarding
Allowance to bring this assistance more in line with the costs of education for isolated families.”
ICPA (Aust) welcomed the former Deputy Minister’s election commitment where he stated, “We
cannot put a university in every regional town. We cannot put a high school in every
corner of our nation. Therefore, we must have the policy settings right so that people
get greater access to that ticket to their own future.”
As a key stakeholder in rural and remote education, ICPA (Aust) was asked for considerations on how
to best allocate the remaining portion of the funding to maximise the benefit to geographically
isolated families in order to access education. ICPA (Aust) made several trips to Canberra in 2016
and 2017 to discuss with government representatives’ various expenditure models. It was suggested
at the time of the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote Education announcement,
that ICPA (Aust) include their proposals regarding the election funding commitment for
geographically isolated families in our submission for the review.
www.icpa.com.au

42

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Proposal One
Assistance for Geographically Isolated Families
Since 1973, successive Australian Governments have provided financial support through the
Assistance for Isolated Children’s (AIC) allowance to families with children who do not have
reasonable daily face to face access to an appropriate government school. Much has changed since
the AIC Scheme was first introduced; the duration of compulsory education has increased and access
to regional term hostels has decreased due to continual closures. Changes are needed to ensure this
allowance meets the needs of families in the twenty-first century.
Accessing compulsory education is a significant financial burden for rural families and is sighted as
one of the main reasons for families leaving rural areas. The Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme
needs to adequately address the out-of-pocket costs incurred by rural and remote families whether
their children need to study via distance education, board away from home or the family sets up a
second home in order to access schooling.
ICPA is proposing the promised funds are distributed in a way that supports current policy to
better support families who do not have access to face-to-face schooling. The Federal Government
recently committed funding for geographically isolated children which included an increase to the
Additional Boarding Allowance. ICPA recommends that utilisation of the balance of this funding
includes assisting geographically isolated children through the AIC Distance Education, Basic
Boarding and Second Home Allowances. This will go a long way in assisting rural and remote families
being able to give their children a quality education. While the promised election funding is
considered to be ‘non-recurrent’, ICPA feels strongly that significant increase in the levels of AIC is
long overdue and that this solution is the most practical way to assist rural and remote families to
access compulsory schooling that is not available to them on a daily, face-to-face basis where they
live.
The AIC allowance consists of three main categories for geographically-isolated students:
• Distance Education Allowance for students living at home and undertaking distance
education
• Boarding and Additional Boarding Allowance for students boarding away from home at a
school hostel or private arrangement and
• Second Home Allowance for students living in the family’s second home so they can attend
school daily.
DISTANCE EDUCATION
Families who educate their children via distance education (DE) are required to establish and
maintain a schoolroom setting, provide extra learning materials and resources, print necessary
learning materials which are supplied to students at mainstream schools. In addition, distance
education families often travel significant distances to participate in school activities that offer
interaction and socialisation for their children. The AIC DE Allowance assists distance education
families with some of these necessary expenses in order to educate their children when living in
geographic isolation.
Distance Education Allowance increase of $750 per annum
5,268 students receive the Distance Education Allowance @ $4124 per annum (2018 rate)
• Increase of $750 per annum = $3,093,750
• Total funding allocation over forward estimate = $12,375,000
BOARDING
Many children living in remote regions of Australia must move away from home to attend school.
Accessing compulsory schooling through boarding comes at a considerable cost to families. After
www.icpa.com.au

43

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

state and commonwealth assistance, ICPA member families have reported that on average their outof-pocket costs (boarding and tuition fees) range between $17,000-35,000 per child per year in
order to access compulsory schooling depending on where they live. The majority of rural and
remote students require boarding 7 days a week due to the vast distance their homes are from the
schools that offer boarding. See www.boardingschools.com.au. This expense is unsustainable for
most. Some families are splitting the family and moving to town to access affordable schooling, or in
some cases choosing between siblings as they cannot afford to keep all of their children in boarding
school. This is negatively impacting the family unit, small communities and rural schools.
The disparity between the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Boarding Allowance and the actual
cost of boarding schools across Australia continues to grow. This growth in disparity is impacting the
intent and effectiveness of the allowance. Rural and remote families are required to contribute
significantly more out-of-pocket costs towards their children’s compulsory education.
Additional Boarding Allowance increase of $1000 per annum
1303 students - 2018 maximum rate $2366 per annum
• $1000 per annum = $1,303,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $5,212,000
Basic Boarding Allowance increase of $1000 per annum
5,211 students receiving the Basic Boarding Allowance @ $8,249 per annum (or cost of boarding,
whichever is lower).
• $1000 per annum = $5,211,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $20,844,000
SECOND HOME
The AIC Second Home Allowance assists families with the cost of setting up a second home away
from their main place of residence, where a family member lives with the children so that they can
attend a school on a day-to-day basis. The option of establishing a second home while children are of
school age, is paramount in efforts to retain families in rural and remote areas of Australia. In many
cases, the mother and children live in the second home during school times and return to their rural
area during school breaks and holidays. This allows the family to access schooling, but also maintain
their connection and support with their rural community as well as work and live in a rural area. If
the Second Home Allowance was not available, more families would move their entire family
permanently to an area were appropriate schooling was available. ICPA advocates for the Second
Home Allowance component of the AIC to be paid at the same rate as the Boarding AIC.
It is in the National interest to ensure isolated children are not disadvantaged in terms of educational
and social development and to ensure their educational outcomes are not compromised. These
students need the opportunity to attend a school that is commensurate to their needs which allows
them to achieve educational parity with their urban peers. It is imperative for rural and remote
families to be able to provide an education for their children while continuing to reside and work in
rural and remote regions.
Second Home Allowance - in line with Basic Boarding Allowance - $1500 per annum
Less than 1000 students receive $240.30 per fortnight ($6,247.80).
• Increase of $1500 per annum = $1,500,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $6,000,000

www.icpa.com.au

44

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

Evidence Base
ICPA (Aust) conducted a Boarding School Research Survey for Geographically Isolated Students in
April 2016 which supports this information and contains many comments from families towards the
end of the booklet: https://www.icpa.com.au/page/attachment/82/final-boarding-school-surveyicpa-aust-with-comments-2016
Calculations for Proposal One - Assistance for Geographically Isolated Families
$44.7 million to increase Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
Calculations are based on - $11,175,000 per annum x 4 years
Additional Boarding Allowance increase of $1000 per annum
1303 students – 2018 maximum rate $2366 per annum
• $1000 per annum = $1,303,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $5,212,000
Basic Boarding Allowance increase of $1000 per annum
5211 students receiving Basic Boarding Allowance @ $8,249 per annum (or cost of boarding,
whichever is lower).
• $1000 per annum = $5,211,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $20,844,000
Second Home Allowance - in line with Basic Boarding Allowance - $1500 per annum
Less than 1000 students receive $240.30 per fortnight ($6,247.80)
• Increase of $1500 per annum = $1,500,000
• Total funding allocation over forward estimates = $6,000,000
Distance Education Allowance increase of $750 per annum
5268 students receive the Distance Education Allowance @$4124 per year
• Increase of $750 per annum = $3,093,750
• Total funding allocation over forward estimate = $12,375,000
Total funding promised - $44,700,000
Total funding assigned through this proposal - $44,431,000
*student numbers are based on the December 2017 figures provided by the Department of Human Services
Any remaining funds to be used towards establishing the Assistance for Isolated Children for
students undertaking an approved 4-year-old early learning program through distance education
similar to the AIC Distance Education component.
Additional Information
• The AIC is not ‘capped’ funding and is paid to all eligible students in geographically isolated areas,
in the past, there has been a larger number of students receiving the AIC. Numbers could possibly
be less due to smaller families and the population shift from rural areas.
• The Assistance for Isolated Children’s (AIC) Scheme has previously been dealt with by the
Department of Education and administered by Centrelink. The AIC is NOT a welfare payment but
addresses equity of access to a quality education for rural and remote students. It is for this
reason that the allowance is different to many other allowances. The AIC does not provide
assistance to address multiple or long term social and welfare issues and has no correlation to
providing a pathway to long term dependence; rather, the AIC is provided to assist with accessing
education during the compulsory years of schooling and must be returned to the Department of
Education and Training.
www.icpa.com.au

45

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

ICPA (Aust) feels strongly that this first proposal is the most proficient means of distributing the
promised funding for geographically isolated families to achieve maximum benefit in assisting the
greatest number of students in need with access to their education.
In the event that the first proposal is not accepted, ICPA (Aust) has suggestions of a further two
proposals.

Proposal Two
Geographically Isolated Educational Grant Program for Rural and Remote Students
ICPA (Aust) welcomed the STEM scholarship program announced as part of the election
commitment to rural students studying at university. Our organisation is proposing that a grant
program be set up for students living in rural and remote locations, who attend small rural schools
or board away from home and require financial support. While there may be a number of options
around the value and the criteria used to access the grants, the value must be truly reflective of the
assistance required and location of the family home. It is anticipated that the funding allocated to
the election commitment would not be expanded over the forward estimates and ICPA (Aust)
recommends that this funding be secured as part of a longer-term commitment to families living and
working in rural Australia.
It is suggested that Geographically Isolated Educational Grants would consist of the following:
1) Increased assistance for students living in rural and remote Australia who are identified as
geographically isolated through the AIC Scheme.
The 50% increase to the AIC Basic Boarding allowance announced as part of the election
commitment was most welcome. However, only 1303 of the 5,211 students, or roughly one quarter,
who are eligible for the AIC Basic Boarding allowance qualify due to the low-income limit placed on
the allowance.
The income limit associated with the Additional Boarding allowance does not consider individual
family situations where families may be financially supporting a number of students at boarding
school and or university or that the cost of living is typically higher in rural and remote areas. The
Educational Grant Program would provide another avenue for assistance in meeting the huge
financial costs imposed on families who cannot access compulsory education on a daily basis from
home.
These grants would be offered through the AIC applications that geographically isolated families fill
out each year. As the AIC is a program that is already in place and has established eligibility criteria,
offering the grants through the AIC would avoid a cumbersome or new process. Running the grants
in conjunction with the AIC would also ensure that students deemed to be “geographically-isolated”
are recipients. Implementation would be an automatic payment of the grant to each AIC recipient,
similar to what has been done in the past with additional funding into the AIC such as “Exceptional
Circumstance” payments which were previously made in times of drought.
These grants could further assist geographically isolated families by also incorporating the following:
2) Keep families in the rural communities by offering financial support in meeting their
children’s educational needs during their secondary education.
There are many families who live in or near rural communities with small high schools who feel that
the local school cannot meet the education needs for their children in the secondary years, and with
no access to financial assistance, these families often leave rural locations. Their decisions are based
on the fact that small rural schools are identified as educationally disadvantaged due to their
location and are deprived of a variety of educational opportunities within and outside the school
www.icpa.com.au

46

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

gate. Many of these families and students need to be better supported in order to feel that they
have a choice when considering where they live and where their children will be educated.
a) Rural High Schools grant should be part of the grant program in order to assist students
to cover the costs associated with pursuing educational enrichment opportunities.
b) Rural student boarding grant that supports families living in rural communities to send
their children to boarding school when they cannot access the AIC boarding allowance
because they have a high school in their community. While small secondary schools
provide an important opportunity for schooling for those who attend them, they should
not be determined as meeting the needs of all students living in that area. Education is a
much broader issue than just basic academic subjects. It encompasses life skills, cultural
experiences, sporting opportunities and exposure to experiences often beyond those
available in a local rural environment. Most of these cannot be accessed by extension
programs via video-conferencing or virtual classrooms. There may be a need for a
culture that offers more challenges or greater opportunities for particular students to
develop a sense of self-worth and confidence in choosing career pathways. These are
vital ingredients for young people in an ever-changing and challenging world in general
and particularly in rural and remote Australia. It is envisioned that the grant would need
to be available to assist the successful applicant for the duration of their boarding.
In conclusion, this funding allocated for isolated students, if put forward in a Geographically Isolated
Educational Grant Scheme, can be extended to assist the most isolated families address the cost of
accessing compulsory schooling whilst also helping to keep families in the bush.

Proposal 3
Rural and Remote Education Foundation
It is recommended that a program for Geographically Isolated Children be created similar to the
Australian Indigenous Education Foundation (AIEF) http://www.aief.com.au/scholarships/aboutthe-program/ which sees federal government, corporate partners and private donors come together
to offer financial support to enable indigenous students in financial need to attend leading
Australian boarding schools and universities. AIEF works with leading schools and tertiary residential
colleges known as “Education Partners” which have shown a commitment to Indigenous education,
student support and pastoral care. AIEF supports their Education Partners by providing financial
resources. As their funding base grows, they aim to partner with more schools and colleges and
offer more scholarships around Australia.
A similar program could be created using the election funding as seed funding to assist all
geographically isolated children in need of financial assistance to access education.

Further Suggestion
•

Since the Regional Airline Senate Inquiry, it has been suggested that the election
commitment funds promised for rural and remote students should be allocated to a travel
allowance added to the AIC to enable geographically isolated students access their
compulsory education, namely boarding school, similar to the Fares Allowance within Youth
Allowance and ABSTUDY for tertiary students.

CONCLUSION
Despite ICPA (Aust) lodging a Pre-Budget 2018-19 submission regarding this election funding and
discussing the allocation of these funds with various Members and Senators, it is a serious concern
www.icpa.com.au

47

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 38

that regional, rural and remote students will miss out on receiving this funding especially as it is
nearly 2 years since the announcement was made by the former DPM Barnaby Joyce. A promise was
made to geographically isolated students and their families to use this funding to assist them in
accessing education and provide them with opportunity to participate on an even playing field with
their urban counterparts. ICPA earnestly requests that the federal government ensures that these
funds do not disappear.

9.6 Rural/urban drift
Addressing the directional flow of rural and remote students towards cities is underpinned by the
very items which this review into rural and remote education is examining and the factors
mentioned by ICPA (Aust) in this submission.
The focus should be NOT on ensuring rural students stay rural, but rather on attracting students,
regardless of whether they are from a country or urban background, to rural and remote areas with
their skills when on completion of their studies. Rural, remote and regional students should not feel
locked in to only being able to study at the regional level and not being allowed to access higher
educational opportunities in larger centres. Even if a completely comparable experience could be
offered at the regional level, rural students should still be afforded the same choice as their city
counterparts of studying where it best suits their needs. The main focus should be on attracting
students and graduates from all backgrounds out to rural and remote areas by offering certainty of
sustainable, vibrant communities, gainful employment and an opportunity to be valued for the skills
they can provide.
In an environment where not only students, but entire families are leaving rural and remote areas to
pursue 'superior' educational opportunities, it is clear that may aspects of education in these areas
are lacking. Thus, consideration needs to be taken to improve rural and remote education so that it
is equitable to that received in urban Australia. This can only be done by taking into consideration
and giving some autonomy to the very people who themselves are immersed within rural and
remote communities and therefore best understand what is needed while supporting these
stakeholders to be able to best implement these changes
This is where an alliance as suggested by ICPA (Aust) would be a suitable way forward, by bringing
together those who have an intimate understanding of rural and remote education to support each
other towards providing the best future outcomes.

Final Conclusion
ICPA (Aust) welcomed the opportunity to share our knowledge and ideas on how educational
inequality for regional students might be improved and how families who aspire to a sustainable and
prosperous industry in which they live, could be better supported when accessing education for their
children. ICPA (Aust) is more than happy to provide additional information on any of the topics that
have been raised and looks forward to reading the recommendations to be presented to
government following this review.

www.icpa.com.au

48

