Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 40

™ Office of the Mayor
PO Box 3130 Bundaberg QLD 4670

A —o P 1300 883 699
BUNDABERG a

REGIONAL COUNCIL

    

27 April 2018

Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100

Parliament House

Canberra ACT 2600

Dear Sir/Madam

Submission by Bundaberg Regional Council — Response to the Inquiry into
Regional Inequality in Australia

 

Overview

Bundaberg Regional Council is pleased to provide a submission to the Inquiry into
Regional Inequality in Australia being undertaken by the Senate Standing Committees
on Economics. Council appreciates the opportunity to provide input into this important
topic, which has wide reaching economic and social implications in regional areas across
both Queensland and Australia.

The Bundaberg Region has established business and industry strengths — including a
traditional agricultural base, value adding manufacturing sector and a burgeoning tourism
industry — that provide the region with comparative advantage and an ideal platform for
innovation, local consumer spending, and export-oriented growth. Yet the region also
suffers from a comparatively high degree of disadvantage due to high levels of
unemployment, chronic public health issues, and a drain of educated youth to larger
population centres. Beyond the social issues, Bundaberg has long contended with under-
utilised infrastructure and capacity in existing assets such as the Port of Bundaberg.

The Bundaberg Region compares poorly to averages for Queensland and Australia
across a range of socioeconomic indicators used to define the level of disadvantage in
the region, specifically:

Unemployment and participation
Labour market conditions in the Bundaberg Region are significantly weaker than other

areas, with the unemployment rate recording a level of 9% in the December Quarter 2017,
which was substantially higher than Queensland (6.1%) and Australia (5.5%)."

1 Australian Bureau of Statistics, June 2017.

dive. work, pay. invest

www.bundaberg.qld.gov.au (#) oO

 
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 40

Further, the State of the Regions Report 2017/18 released by the Australian Local
Government Association indicated that the Wide Bay Burnett region recorded the highest
adjusted unemployment rate (16.7%) of all regions across Australia. Moreover, the
participation rate (i.e. proportion of the resident population aged 15 and over in the labour
force) for the Bundaberg Region was 49.6% in 2016, having declined by 2% over the past
five years, whilst also being significantly lower than Queensland (61%) and Australia
(60.3%).

In addition, youth unemployment (15 to 24 year olds) in the Wide Bay statistical area
reached 28.7% in March 2018, which is the second highest of all statistical areas — behind
only Outback Queensland.

Education

The population of Bundaberg has a relatively low attainment level of higher education
with 9.3% not having attended school or having attained Year 8 or below; 38% attaining
Year 9 or 10; and 42.5% reaching Year 11 or 12. Conversely, only 9.8% of the population
attained a bachelor degree or higher.? Low attainment rates of higher education represent
a significant challenge to regional areas, leading to increased levels of unemployment
and continued dependency on welfare programs.

Health

Bundaberg is located within the Central Queensland, Wide Bay and Sunshine Coast
Primary Health Network (PHN). Specific health outcomes from this PHN catchment are
particularly poor and include:

e In 2014-15, 67.2% of people aged 18 and over were overweight or obese in the
PHN. This rate was significantly higher than the rates for Queensland (63.1%)
and Australia (63.0%).

e Based on two years of hospital data (2012/13 and 2013/14) from the Heart
Foundation, the LGA with the highest rate of hospital admissions for heart
conditions was Bundaberg.

e National Health Performance Authority (NHPA) data 2013-14 reports that 55% of
people in the catchment reported having a long-term health condition with higher
rates of potentially preventable hospitalisations (compared to Australia) due to
chronic disease, heart failure, COPD and diabetes.

Underutilised Infrastructure

A prime example of an underutilised regional asset is the Port of Bundaberg. Over the
past 10 years, the Port has handled between 12-16 vessels per year and has had on
average a berth utilisation of just 5%. While berth utilisation is improving and is expected
to increase to around 20% in 2017/18, considerable scope exists for additional vessel
calls.*

? Queensland Government Statistician’s Office 2018. Queensland Regional Profiles.
3 Central Queensland, Wide Bay, Sunshine Coast Primary Health Network. 2017-18 Health Needs Assessment.
4 Gladstone Ports Corporation.
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 40

In order to develop the long term strategic direction of the Port, Council and the
Queensland Government are working on the phased delivery of investigations into key
aspects of the Port, which include critical short term investment (i.e. common-use bulk
handling infrastructure and services); corridor feasibility and options analysis to link
opportunities in the North Burnett to the Port; and State Development Area (SDA)
planning and infrastructure assessment.

This investigative work is intended to qualify the assistance required from local, State and
Federal Governments in order to bring long term strategic projects to fruition.

Council, in partnership with Gladstone Ports Corporation and Wide Bay Bumett Regional
Organisation of Councils has also recently commissioned a complementary piece of
research that will identify infrastructure opportunities for the Australian Government to
consider funding in support of the region — and the Port of Bundaberg’s — growth over the
next 30 years.

Telecommunications

Both the State and Federal Governments are committed to a future of technological
change and innovation — supported by high speed Internet that will help to lessen the
tyranny of distance for regional areas. While Bundaberg was one of the first 10
communities to begin rollout of the NBN, communications issues have persisted —
including that of regional broadband capacity constraints.

Council is hopeful for future opportunities through the Queensland and Australian
Governments that may provide fast, affordable high-speed internet. The potential for
opening up spare capacity on fibre networks used by state-owned corporations would
unlock the existing constraints of inadequate connectivity in Bundaberg and other
communities in regional Queensland. Council sees enormous opportunity with this
initiative, and following a favourable investigative outcome regarding use of this
infrastructure, Council would seek to be an early-stage pilot region for rollout of this high
speed network.

City Deal for the Wide Bay Burnett

These complex issues, although distinct in nature, are deeply intertwined. The capacity
to facilitate greater regional development and alleviate these challenges through industry
cluster initiatives and coordinated State and Federal government support are key to
reducing the inequities experienced both in Bundaberg and regional Australia. With
significant investment allocated to Southeast Queensland and substantial funding
delivered to Townsville through a Federal Government City Deal, the Bundaberg Region
and greater Wide Bay Burnett (with a population base of nearly 300,000) are
geographically isolated from where substantial investment has historically been
delivered. The Bundaberg Region is hopeful that the Commonwealth will consider
Bundaberg and the greater Wide Bay Burnett for such future investment opportunities
that will help to alleviate these issues of regional disadvantage.

Submitted b

 
