Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia
Senate Economic Reference Committee
April 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

The Inquiry
On 14 February 2018, the Senate referred an inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional
inequality in Australia to the Senate Economics References Committee for inquiry and report by
the last day on sitting in June 2019.

Terms of Reference
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
j)
k)
l)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
regional development policies;
infrastructure;
education;
building human capital;
enhancing local workforce skills;
employment arrangements;
decentralisation policies;
innovation;
manufacturing; and
any other related matters.

E2015/25649

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

Byron Shire Council submits the following responses.
a.

Illustrative example 1: Early childhood education and care in the Byron Shire

The first illustrative example refers to TOR items:
b)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
infrastructure
education
building human capital
enhancing local workforce skills
employment arrangements

Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and unequal
outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
Byron Shire Council has undertaken a study into key areas of Children’s Services in the Byron Shire,
including Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) and Out of School Hours Care (OSHC). In the
Byron Shire, ECEC is provided through Long Day Care, Preschool and Family Day Care while a range
of other services and individuals provide additional types of support to children.
Prior to this study, both residents and service providers had highlighted that access to flexible and
affordable ECEC is a key challenge for local families. Accessing quality ECEC has a significant impact
on developmental outcomes for children, workforce participation for parents and carers, and long
term social and economic wellbeing outcomes for individuals, families and communities.
The experiences highlighted in the Byron Shire are part of a broader national issue, with
similarities echoing in varied regional settings throughout Australia.
There is a significant deficit of ECEC places in the Byron Shire
In a recent survey of parents and carers in the Byron Shire, over two thirds of respondents stated
that they had not been able to access the childcare they required to meet the needs of their
family.1 For the vast majority, this was due to a lack of available places.
While estimates indicate 1233 children being able to access part-time ECEC in the Byron Shire,
there are approximately 2300 children aged 0-5 currently living in the area. Actual current demand
calculated on a benchmark of 80% participation2 on a part-time basis equates to 1840 local
children being engaged with ECEC. (Universal access benchmarks of 95% enrolment in the year
before schooling have not been included, which further lowers the estimated total current
demand.) Therefore the gap between demand and supply is estimated at 607 children or, using
the current model of supply indicated above, 357 full-time licensed places spread across the
service spectrum.

Byron Shire Council. (2016). Childcare in Byron Shire – parents and carers survey. Unpublished.
Municipal Council. (2013). A review of Early Education and Care service delivery for children under school
age in the Leichardt Local Government Area..
1

2 Leichardt

Byron Shire Council | Regional inequality in Australia - submission | April 2018
E2015/25649

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

Waitlists
Based on data from local services providing centre-based care, waitlist times vary from 2 months
to indefinite, with an average of 1-2 years. Several providers indicated waitlists of 150 to over 200
children. The waitlist for Family Day Care in the Byron Shire is currently over 200. Of the services
that provided care for children aged 0-2, all providers indicated that, due to scarcity, demand for
these places was greater than average overall demand.
Accessing ECEC for children aged 0-2 is particularly difficult
In all settings, National Quality Standards state that staff ratios for children aged 0-2 are higher
than those aged 3-5. Therefore providing ECEC for children aged 3-5 requires less human
resourcing investment and can offer greater commercial appeal for providers.
Parents and carers have concerns about waitlists
In addition to the length of waitlists for local services, parents and carers indicated concerns in
relation to the fairness of place allocation. This is related, in part, to service policies that aim to
prioritise sibling access when allocating available places. Anecdotal evidence indicates that this
practice contributes to places being made available to children whose sibling is/has recently
attended a centre prior to places being made available to children of working parents.
The Australian Early Development Census (AEDC) is a nationwide data collection of early childhood
development at the time children commence their first year of full-time school. The AEDC
highlights what is working well and what needs to be improved or developed to support children
and their families by providing evidence to support health, education and community policy and
planning.
The AEDC is held every three years, with the 2015 AEDC data collection being the third collection.
Data collected covers five key areas of early childhood development referred to as ‘domains’ that
have been shown to predict later health and wellbeing outcomes, including:






Physical health and well being
Social competence
Emotional maturity
Language and cognitive skills
Communication skills and general knowledge

Emerging trends show an overall decline in rates and numbers of developmental vulnerability in
the community over all domains of the Australian Early Development Census during the period
2009-20153. However, there are key areas where there has been an increase in the rates and
numbers of developmentally at risk and vulnerable children during the 2012-2015 period,
including:
 Social competence
 Emotional maturity
 Language and cognitive skills

3

Australian Early Development Census. (2015). Community Profile 2015: Byron, NSW.

Byron Shire Council | Regional inequality in Australia - submission | April 2018
E2015/25649

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

There are geographical pockets where the rates of developmentally vulnerable and at risk children
are higher (Mullumbimby) and significantly higher (Myocum, Goonengerry and Wilson’s Creek)
than state and national averages.
Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and other
areas
Byron Shire constitutes 560 square kilometers and suburbs, townships and localities are dispersed
broadly throughout the entirety of the area. The Shire-wide population at 2016 was approximately
32,400 residents, consisting of 2,300 children aged 0-5 with 1,900 of those children aged 0-4.
Projected annual population growth is calculated to average at 0.8% through to 2036, with a total
population of 35,250 by 2026 and 37,950 by 20364. Population increase is forecast to be highly
concentrated the 65+ age brackets while increase in the 0-5 group is projected to change only
modestly over time.
Household data indicates that couples with young children (defined as aged 15 or under) make up
approximately 13% of the population and single parents with young children constitute around
6%. Within the Shire, there is a greater proportion of one parent families when compared to the
Australian average (23.7% vs. 15.8%), however this information does not specify child age.
Factors contributing to disadvantage
Pockets of significant disadvantage exist in Byron Bay, Brunswick Heads and the western rural
districts5.
The unemployment rate in Byron Shire is persistently higher compared to regional, state and
national averages, with recent demographic profiling indicating local unemployment at double the
rate of that of the NSW average (11.5% vs 5.7%)6. Further, employment growth is slow and there
are consistently high rates of part-time, seasonal and casual work.
A high unemployment rate, low participation rate and high rate of part-time work all contribute to
low household and individual income in Byron Shire7. Average income is below that of both
Regional NSW and NSW more broadly, with no evidence of incomes increasing over time, and the
concentration of work is in the lowest paid industries.
Housing costs, both rent and mortgage, are very high compared to incomes, with housing prices
approximately double the Regional NSW average, yet income slightly lower than average. Rates of
housing stress are calculated at approximately double the national average.

Planning and Environment NSW. (2016). NSW State and Local Government Area Population and Household
Projections, and Implied Dwelling Requirements.
5 id.profile. (2016). Byron Shire Strategic Context Assessment: Analysis of economic, demographic and disadvantage
issues in the Byron Shire.
6 .id.profile. (2016). Byron Shire Strategic Context Assessment: Analysis of economic, demographic and disadvantage
issues in the Byron Shire.
7 .id.profile. (2016). Byron Shire Strategic Context Assessment: Analysis of economic, demographic and disadvantage
issues in the Byron Shire.
4

Byron Shire Council | Regional inequality in Australia - submission | April 2018
E2015/25649

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

Additional factors that contribute to inequality between our region and larger regional centres and
capital include:
 lack of vocational education and training provision in the Shire
 lack of access to affordable housing for key workers
 lack of access to transport
 net migration of young people aged 18-24, constituting 86% of the total net migration from
the Shire
 lack of provision of ECEC services for children from Aboriginal and Culturally and
Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities
Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
Inability to access ECEC and OSHC generates significant negative economic and social impact for
both individuals and societies
ECEC can bring significant and wide-ranging benefits for children, parents and society more
broadly. The development that occurs between the ages of 0-5 is critical in predicting long term
health, education, employment and overall wellbeing outcomes for both adults and communities.
90% of brain development happens in the first five years of life and high quality ECEC plays a vital
role in development during this time, particularly for children who are vulnerable or at risk8.
Research recognises that early childhood education and care brings a wide range
of benefits, for example, better child wellbeing and learning outcomes as a
foundation for lifelong learning; more equitable child outcomes and the
reduction of poverty; increased intergenerational social mobility; more female
labour market participation; increased fertility rates; and better social and
economic developments for the society at large. 9
While the benefits to individual children from participating in quality ECEC are commonly
acknowledged, the broader flow on effects in relation to society are less commonly emphasised.
Access to ECEC enables parental workforce participation, particularly for women, thereby
contributing to employment, productivity and gender equality outcomes at a broader societal
level10. This is similarly true for other types of education and care for children that enable
workforce participation, such as OSHC.
Economist James Heckman argues that early childhood education is the best value investment that
a government can make, delivering rates of return higher than 7:1.
Inability to access ECEC and OSHC has a negative impact on families and particularly on women
Extensive local data demonstrated that lack of access to ECEC and OSHC excludes parents and
carers, particularly women, from workforce participation. In addition, difficulties with access
challenge individual and family wellbeing. Respondents described their experiences in many ways
from ‘upsetting’ and ‘very stressful’ to ‘annoying’ with consequences including ‘family stress’,

Education Services Australia. (2010). Engaging Families in the Early Childhood Development Story.
OECD. (2012). Starting Strong III: A quality toolbox for early childhood education and care.
10 Productivity Commission. (2014). Childcare and Early Childhood Learning.
8
9

Byron Shire Council | Regional inequality in Australia - submission | April 2018
E2015/25649

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 41

‘financial’ disadvantage, ‘significant personal cost’, becoming ‘desperate’ and negatively
‘impacting relationships’.11
Examples of solutions
Solutions all hinge on a single core principle: providing affordable and flexible access to high
quality Early Childhood Education and Care.
In the Byron Shire context, solutions would need to encompass:





provision of vocational education and training pathways in the Shire
affordable housing for key workers
improved public and active transport options for workers and families
co-designing culturally appropriate ECEC services for children from Aboriginal and
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities

Policy settings that could help address inequality between regions
It is recommended that the following are considered in light of possible policy settings:
1. Recognise ECEC and OSHS as a fundamental economic participation strategy rather than an
aspirational social ‘non-essential’ service, and incorporate policy provisions accordingly.
2. Promote in principle support for an increase in supply across Long Day Care, Preschool and
Family Day Care.
3. Take a lead role, together with sector bodies, to undertake local, state and federal
advocacy for an increase in supply of ECEC.
4. Require any new ECEC service to have a proportion of places (30%) allocated to children
aged 0-2.
5. Explore opportunities to support access for children and families experiencing
disadvantage e.g. the Supporting Aboriginal Children’s Access to Children’s Services project
led by Penrith City Council, NSW State Government social impact bonds etc.
6. Encourage consideration of sector strategies and campaigns to attract qualified staff to the
region and increase the number of local educators.
7. Incorporate ECEC into an outcomes framework that can measure and highlight social and
economic impact of strategies over time.

11

Byron Shire Council. (2016). Childcare in Byron Shire – parents and carers survey. Unpublished.

Byron Shire Council | Regional inequality in Australia - submission | April 2018
E2015/25649

5

