Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 43

UNE submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Economics Inquiry
into the Indicators & impact of regional inequality in Australia
Introduction to the University of New England
Located in Armidale, in the heart of northern New South Wales, the University of New England
(UNE) was the first Australian university established outside a capital city. With a history extending
back to the 1920s UNE has a well-earned reputation as one of Australia's great teaching, training
and research universities.
Through its leading role in the provision of distance education, UNE has contributed to the
nation's development over more than half a century — while enhancing the lives of thousands of
people who would otherwise have been unable to pursue university studies. Today, UNE is
extending its reach through the adoption of the latest communication technologies, and is
recognised as an innovator in flexible online education.
Comments on the Inquiry into the indicators & impact of regional inequality in Australia –
inequality in provision of & access to education
The University of New England is pleased to provide a submission to the submission to the Senate
Standing Committee on Economics Inquiry into the Indicators and impact of regional inequality
in Australia. With a strong commitment to, and years of experience in, the provision of regional
and rural tertiary education, this submission focuses primarily on the role of education in regional
Australia, and in particular, the inequality with regard to the provision of educational services
compared to metropolitan areas.
With regard to rural, regional and remote educational disadvantage, it is well known that for those
living outside Australia’s metropolitan areas, the likelihood of attainment of post-secondary
qualifications is significantly lower than for those in capital cities. The significant role that
universities in regional Australia play in addressing this disparity should not be under estimated.
Regional universities play a significant role as anchor institutions for their regions, and contribute
significantly to regional economies. Through their presence in regional communities and
outreach activities to schools they encourage aspiration for university study and professional
vocations. Around three-quarters of those who study at a university in the regions stay in the

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 43

regions to work where they enrich regional economies and communities, and provide professional
role models for regional school students. Only a quarter of those students who go to capital cities
to study at university return to the regions. We are therefore of the view that there should be
more incentives/encouragement for regional school students to study at regional university
campuses.
The University of New England is among the highest in the sector in terms of the proportion of
indigenous students (3.3%), students from low SES backgrounds (25%), rural and remote students
(43% and 2.3% respectively). Many of these cohorts require more support than a typical schoolleaver studying on-campus. Unlike many metropolitan universities, however, UNE does not have
access to a large cohort of fee-paying international students to bolster income that supports and
enables these activities. It is our fear that an unintended consequence of the freeze on CGS
funding for undergraduate places will be that many of these at-risk students will be unable to
secure access to higher education, as providers with access to large populations of traditional
school-leaver students will be discouraged by the financial disincentive to admit higher-risk
student cohorts regardless of the societal and economic benefit of doing so. Another unintended
consequence of the cap on undergraduate funding is that it is far more attractive from a purely
financial perspective to recruit students into Business and Law related disciplines, despite the
fact that our regional communities are in desperate need of graduates in health, education,
science, agriculture and other disciplines that are more expensive to deliver.
The underrepresentation of students from regional, rural and remote backgrounds in higher
education is linked to poorer educational opportunities in general, as well as the aspirations of
young people as revealed in recent data (Gore, 2016, Aspirations: Longitudinal study) being less
focused on tertiary education options. This finding was reinforced in the recently released
Independent review into Regional, Remote and Rural Education by Emeritus Professor Halsey
which noted that “the achievements of RRR (regional, remote and rural) have in the main lagged
behind urban students for decades”1. This is reflected in poorer outcomes for regional remote
and rural students in terms of NAPLAN results, and is ultimately reflected in lower ATAR results
for regional students. This is not due to an inherent lack of ability amongst students in regional
and rural Australia, but rather to structural disadvantage with regard to the distribution of
resources and funding, which sees significantly reduced opportunities available in nonmetropolitan areas.

1

Halsey, J., Independent review into Regional, Remote and Rural Education, 2018 p.4
Page 2 of 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 43

The aspiration to participate in higher education is formed during the formative schooling years.
Serious policy commitment should be given to ensuring that teachers in rural and regional are
supported to ensure that they are able to meet the learning needs of students in these areas. It
should be noted that the current requirement of three band 5 HSC results for entry into teaching
degrees creates further bias against students from non-metropolitan backgrounds. UNE firmly
believes that this is a discriminatory and punitive measure which disadvantages sectors of the
community more than others. Further, it should be the responsibility of Universities to ensure
that, regardless of social or geographic circumstances, teaching graduates leave university with
the same level of competency despite possible disadvantage in their pre-university back ground.
It should be noted that the recently released literary and numeracy results for education
graduates demonstrated high pass rates for UNE. Many of these graduates would have entered
UNE prior to the imposition of the ATAR requirement, and many would not have met this standard.
Regardless, they graduated with good literary and numeracy skills.
To meet the continuing professional development needs of teachers in rural, remote and regional
areas, education authorities, in partnership with schools and communities, universities, and
professional organisations could develop a range of strategies to ensure equitable access to
ongoing quality professional learning. Approaches could include:


The development of flexible staffing and school timetabling arrangements to allow
scheduling of professional development;



The development of improved systems and strategies for collaborative face-to-face and
online modes of professional development for teachers in rural and regional locations;



Promoting cross-sectoral collaboration in meeting the professional development needs of
teachers on a local basis;



Funding research, development and dissemination of strategies to teach science, ICT and
mathematics to the diverse range of students found in rural and regional classrooms;



Implementing strategies for mentoring rural and regional mathematics, science and ICT
teachers at various career stages, e.g., establishment of local networks such as the
Association of Rural Educators, and initiatives such as the Rural School Leadership
Program.

One strategy that education authorities, in partnership with universities, local councils, industries
and businesses could develop is to promote the advantages of living and teaching in rural
communities.
Page 3 of 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 43



Strategies could include publicity campaigns promoting rural teaching, aimed at both preservice and experienced teachers;



Education authorities could also collaborate with university education faculties to engage
experienced rural teachers to address pre-service teachers about the benefits and
challenges of rural schools;



Another strategy could be the development of programs whereby groups of pre-service
students visit rural and remote schools (e.g., Beyond the Line in New South Wales) if
something similar is not already in place.

Further, it would be advantageous if education authorities, in collaboration with professional
organisations, develop and monitor induction and orientation strategies to support the particular
needs of teachers new to rural and regional schools including, as appropriate:


Teaching Indigenous students, including an awareness of Indigenous cultural issues
within local contexts;



Teaching multi-grade and multi-subject classes;



Teaching out of curriculum area;



Working with limited resources including support staff;



Teaching students with special needs;



Living in rural communities.

We would be pleased to offer further feedback to the inquiry if required. For any further
information, please contact
Submitted 30 April 2018.

Page 4 of 4

