Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

Submission - Newcastle City Council
Senate Economics References Committee - Inquiry into the
indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
The Terms of Reference
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;

b)

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;

c)

regional development policies;

d)

infrastructure;

e)

education;

f)

building human capital;

g)

enhancing local workforce skills;

h)

employment arrangements;

i)

decentralisation policies;

j)

innovation;

k)

manufacturing; and

l)

any other related matters

Submission by Newcastle City Council to the Senate Economics
References Committee Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia
Newcastle - powering the State
Newcastle is at the economic and cultural centre of the Hunter Region - Australia's most
productive region - and home to more than 750,000 people. The Hunter region attracts over
10 million visitors each year and accounts for 8.3% of economic activity in NSW with a gross
regional output of $48 Billion in 2017. Newcastle, as the regional capital, was named as one
of the world's top 'smart cities to watch in 2017' by global National Geographic Traveller
magazine, as a city rising to the challenges of 21st century life.
Newcastle is the Australian exemplar of successful post-industrial transition to a diverse,
knowledge-based, professional services economy. It is acknowledged by multiple Australian

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

sources, including Austrade and Australian Smart Communities Association, as a leading
smart city. This recognition is based on our firm commitment and rapid progress in
establishing Newcastle and the Hunter Region as an internationally recognised centre for
technology innovation, including health, energy and defence industries. Ultimately,
Newcastle City Council, as the representative of the City of Newcastle, believes that
Newcastle should be classified as a metropolitan area.
But what this requires is consistency from the Federal and State Governments and
investment to the scale befitting a metropolitan City which is the economic powerhouse of
New South Wales and the State's second City. Greater Newcastle’s economy has
successfully transitioned to a service-based economy with developing strengths in health,
education, defence, tourism and the creative industries sectors of the economy. The
University of Newcastle, Newcastle Airport, the Port of Newcastle and the John Hunter
Hospital are key metropolitan level assets providing opportunities to further grow the service
economy and support ongoing transition.
Greater Newcastle is part of the Asia Pacific, and centrally located on the eastern seaboard
of Australia. This positions Greater Newcastle to grow industries and to attract firms and
skilled workers from many areas. Proximity to Sydney provides opportunities for industry
specialisation for goods and services to Australia’s largest market. Greater Newcastle can
build on its economic independence so that it complements, rather than competes with,
Sydney.
The ‘global gateways’ of Newcastle Port and Newcastle Airport provide enormous
opportunity for increased international connectivity coupled with lifestyle, education and
business development opportunities. Proximity to Sydney positions Greater Newcastle to
make the most of increasing demand for goods and services to and from Asia with an
expanding range of professional and trade services being developed in both global
gateways; but possibly being inhibited through the regional (inequality) policy positions of
government. A Greater Newcastle City Deal would be able to combine multiple levels of
Government in projects to deliver an increase in regional productivity at a significantly lower
cost than metropolitan areas; both socially and financially. The improvement in human /
social capital brought about by a sustainable approach to regional development through a
City Deal for Greater Newcastle remains as a regional objective, as opposed to an action, as
the multiple levels of government have remained unable to agree on the best programs and
related policy positions suitable to this regional area.
Newcastle Airport at Williamtown is one of the largest combined defence facility and civilian
airport in Australia. Increased flight activity within the current operational conditions will build
towards an aspiration of 5 million passengers annually by 2036 to support new international
services to locations across the Asia Pacific. Major upgrades to the RAAF Base to
accommodate the new Joint Strike Fighters (F-35) will create a cluster of aerospace related
economic activity and new jobs. Greater Newcastle’s growing capabilities in science,
technology, engineering and maths supported through the continuing efforts of RDA Hunter
will service these opportunities well into the future.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

The Newcastle City Centre is an important catalyst for a vibrant and internationally-facing
Greater Newcastle. It has capacity to accommodate corporate headquarters, key institutions
and shared amenities. Continued city revitalisation, improved transport connectivity, and
high quality buildings and places are attracting new business start-ups, and encouraging
established businesses to open new outposts. The University of Newcastle and Nihon
University International Campus (Japan) will continue to make the education and training
sector a key source of growth in Greater Newcastle’s economy, and relatively stronger than
other regions in NSW. Greater Newcastle will become a university city, with campuses for a
diverse range of international universities. This will strengthen the opportunity to educate
Greater Newcastle's workforce for the growing service industries.
Greater Newcastle also attracts domestic and international tourists through its iconic tourist
destinations including world-renowned vineyards at Pokolbin, surf beaches, vibrant city
centres, and daytime and night-time cultural experiences.
Regional or Metropolitan?

There remains an ongoing discrepancy between the Federal and State Government's
approach to the classification of the City of Newcastle as either 'regional' or
'metropolitan'. Australian state capital cities are no longer the only metropolitan areas.
Whilst our cities are being recognised at home and around the world as world class, and
global cities, the approach from State and Federal government funding bodies is
unclear. Consistency is required.
For example, the Federal Government's Department of Health uses the Modified
Monash Model to determine if a city or metropolitan location eligible for funding. Under
the Modified Monash Model, a provider of funding, the Regional Arts Fund, cannot
principally benefit a location classified as MMM Classification 1. The City of Newcastle
falls within this classification.
Recently, the Deputy Premier of New South Wales, the Hon. John Barilaro MP, advised
the Parliament of New South Wales that Newcastle would be ineligible to receive
funding from the $4.15 billion earned from the sell-off of the New South Wales
Government's share of the Snowy Hydro Scheme. The Deputy Premier said it was clear
that Newcastle is not 'regional', and declared the City of Newcastle as 'metropolitan'.
This declaration is at odds with several key policy and strategy documents produced by
the New South Wales Government, where the City of Newcastle remains 'regional'.
On the one hand, the Government will declare Newcastle 'Regional', with significant
documents such as the Hunter Regional Plan 2036 having Newcastle as the urban heart
of the 'regional Hunter'.
The Government's own Department of Planning office is signposted as the 'Newcastle
Regional Office'.
Similarly, the 'Invest in New South Wales' website administered by the Department of
Premier and Cabinet encourages investment into the Hunter Region declaring that "the
Hunter Region is the largest regional economy in Australia and NSW, and home to
Greater Newcastle, the seventh largest urban area in Australia."
Despite this, Newcastle is ineligible to apply for funding from the Regional Growth Fund
and the Stronger Communities Fund. Critically, Newcastle City Council was also

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

ineligible to apply for funding for the upgrade of Newcastle Art Gallery from the $100
million Regional Cultural Fund for Cultural Infrastructure. This is despite the NSW
Government's Infrastructure NSW supporting 'investment in arts and cultural facilities in
Regional NSW including Newcastle and Wollongong.'
On the other hand, the NSW Government failed to provide any funding for Newcastle Art
Gallery, or other cultural infrastructure in Newcastle, under the $600 million Cultural
Infrastructure Program, raised from the privatisation of the state's electricity network.
Interestingly, the Art Gallery of NSW received almost $250 million to expand, modernise
and attract more tourism dollars.
The Federal Government's Building Better Region Fund describes "regional Australia"
as being 'all areas outside the major capital cities of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane,
Perth, Adelaide and Canberra.' Independent experts such as the Regional Australia
Institute have supported this definition. According to the State Government, Lake
Macquarie is considered definitively 'regional' despite some suburbs in that Local
Government Area being only minutes from the Newcastle CBD.
The City of Newcastle points to the New South Wales Government's Future Transport
2056 strategy, which defines Greater Newcastle as 'a key Global Gateway City' with a
catchment of over 1 million people,' as an example of the State Government recognising
the City of Newcastle as an emerging global City and our status as a metropolitan City.
Ultimately, the City of Newcastle believes that Newcastle should be classified as a
metropolitan area.
Improved coordination of Federal State and local government policies
RDA Hunter has long been established in Greater Newcastle and has always retained an
office presence in the City. Following the Independent Review of the Regional Development
Australia Program, the Australian Government adopted a new Charter for RDA.
Regional Development Australia (RDA) is a national network of Committees made up
of local leaders who work with all levels of government, business and community
groups to support the economic development of their regions.
RDA Committees have an active and facilitative role in their communities and a clear
focus on growing strong and confident regional economies that harness their
competitive advantages seize on economic opportunity and attract investment.
Working in close partnership with fellow RDA Committees, all levels of government,
and the private sector, RDA Committees will:
1. Collaborate with relevant stakeholders to identify economic opportunities
and leverage private and public sector investment to the regions;
2. Connect regional businesses, councils and industry sectors with
international trade partners, financial markets and potential investors;
3. Promote and disseminate information on Australian Government policies
and grant programs to state and local governments and industry, business
and community sectors;
4. Support community stakeholders to develop project proposals to access
funding;
5. Develop and maintain positive working relationships with the local
government bodies in their regions;

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

6. Facilitate public and private sector decentralisation;
7. Assist in the delivery of Australian Government programs, where relevant
and where requested by the Minister;
8. Engage with regional entrepreneurs and emerging business leaders to
explore new opportunities to grow local jobs in their regions;
9. Provide information on their region's activities and competitive advantages
to all levels of government, industry, business and community sectors; and
10. Provide evidence-based advice to the Australian Government on critical
regional development issues positively and negatively affecting their regions.

Infrastructure development
The high concentration of mining and power generation related transport infrastructure is the
result of a coordinated supply chain from the upper areas of the Hunter Region through to
the export facilities located in the Port of Newcastle. This level of infrastructure is seen as a
major advantage for Greater Newcastle as its role as the powerhouse for NSW but exists in
a regional area as it is extremely unsuitable for heavily developed metropolitan or urban
areas. The development of major regional facilities for industry throughout Australia is
designed to improve the amenity available in urban areas, reduce conflicting land use issues
and protect metropolitan areas from unsuitable environmental conditions.
The inequality then experienced by regional areas when seeking improvements or support
through Australian and State policy or programs should be questioned to ensure that the
productivity of secondary industry is not lost to the nation. High productivity rates in capital
cities are generally as a result of knowledge based industry contribution, supported by a
concentrated workforce. If regional areas are to succeed in higher level objectives that give
rise to success in decentralisation policies the creation of the required fiscal policies settings
at Australian and State Government levels.
The New Urban Agenda
The Australian Government committed to the New Urban Agenda (NUA) and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) created by the United Nations in October 2016.
This international framework creates the opportunity for all levels of government to share
common goals and work together.
The NUA, presented at the Habitat 3 conference in October 2016, strongly emphasised the
crucial role cities will play in achieving sustainable development for future generations, with
the majority of the world's population now living in urban areas and cities key generators of
employment and wealth. The conference created a new focus on the role local government
and professional town planners and other urban professionals in delivering sustainable
development.
Currently around 54.5% of the world's population lives in urban areas. By 2030, this will rise
to 60%; and 2050, 70%. In Australia, the figures are even higher. Cities provide the
greatest opportunity we know for generating economic growth, employment, housing

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

choices, culture, education and a broad range of services. Cities, as concentrations of
people, however, are also vulnerable to the worst impacts from natural and man-made
disasters, climate change and financial trends, and cities sustain the greatest levels of
inequality.
Both the challenges and opportunities that cities and urban areas create, can be addressed
through integrated planning, good governance and management and appropriate economic
resources. A key element here is promoting the education and training of urban
professionals and decision makers, and promoting excellence in governance and
management.
A leadership role now exists for the Australian government to encourage the implementation
and reporting of the SDGs, from the Federal to the local level. This would provide a
consistent set of indicators across all levels of government.
Homelessness

Newcastle City Council resolved in February 2018, to
Newcastle City Council supports and pledges to do our part to end homelessness.
We commit to working towards ending homelessness. Newcastle City Council will
advocate for change and enlist the support of our partners to join this important effort,
and let local leaders know that we support The Newcastle and Hunter Ending
Homelessness Pledge.
This commits Council to the following values:
The right to a safe and secure home is a human right.
Homelessness in Newcastle and the Hunter region is not an intractable problem – it
can be solved.
When members of our community experience homelessness, we all suffer. Our entire
community can be a part of the solution.
Every business, agency, neighbourhood, and resident, can have a role in preventing
homelessness and supporting people who experience homelessness.

Homelessness has become the clearest expression of inequality and poverty in Australia
and the UN Sustainable Development Goal One - No Poverty - cannot be achieved without
ending homelessness.
The human right to adequate housing was enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1948. More recently, the UN Sustainable Development Goals (2015) and the New
Urban Agenda (2016) have placed the right to housing at the centre of their objectives to
ensure that ‘no-one is left behind’ and that we create ‘cities for all’.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 44

Everyone has a role to play in ending homelessness. Individuals, local businesses, real
estate agents, volunteer groups, Federal, state and local governments can all contribute, to
achieving an overall goal of providing permanent, affordable housing and the support that
people need to create and keep a home.
The Newcastle and Hunter Ending Homelessness Pledge is an opportunity for individuals
and organisations to join with a collective objective to end homelessness in the region.
Many cities where most progress has been achieved towards this objective have begun with
a pledge to focus interest, advocate for change and coordinate the many efforts required to
achieve this ambition.

