Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45

  

= LatrobeCity

Our Ref: anew energy

GVD:BG
Latrobe City ABN 92 472 314 133
Telephone 1300 367 700
Facsimile (03) 5128 5672

30 April 2018 TTY (NRS) 133 677
Post to PO Box 264 Morwell VIC 3840
Email Address latrobe@latrobe.vic.gov.au

Chai Internet www.latrobe.vic.gov.au
air

Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100

Parliament House

CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Senator
INQUIRY INTO REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

On behalf of Latrobe City Council, | am pleased to make this submission to the
Senate Economics References Committee’s Inquiry into regional inequality in
Australia.

Background

Latrobe City is the only regional city in south-east Victoria and is one of Victoria’s four
major regional cities. It is the service, commercial and residential hub for Gippsland,
which has a population of over 270,000.

Latrobe City is resource rich with abundant forests, rich agricultural land, water
resources and large deposits of brown coal.

Latrobe City is a major centre for Health Services with the Latrobe Regional Hospital
Gippsland’s pre-eminent regional health facility and our largest employer.

Latrobe City is a major centre for education services with Federation University’s
Churchill Campus providing access to tertiary education; and Federation Training,
through its Campuses at Morwell, Sale, Traralgon and Yallourn providing access to
vocational training across the Latrobe Valley.

Latrobe City is a major industrial centre:

generating 85% of Victoria’s electricity;

with Australia’s largest integrated pulp and paper mill;

home to Australia’s largest yoghurt manufacturing facility; and
Australia’s only manufacturer of commercial aircraft.

Latrobe City is home to 73,240 people, 4,480 businesses, and a labour force of
35,550. Its Gross Regional Product is over $4.34 billion per annum.

Latrobe City is known for its excellence in engineering capability, health care,
education and public administration, - and as a cultural and commercial centre for
Gippsland. It is home to a highly skilled and diverse workforce.

Moe 1-29 George Street Morwell 141 Commercial Road Churchill Hub 9-11 Philip Parade Traralgon 34-38 Kay Street

Paper manufactured at Australian Paper, Maryale
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45

The Latrobe Valley: a region in transition

The privatisation of the electricity industry in the 1990’s led to a significant reduction
in workforce with little or no structural adjustment assistance provided by either the
State or Commonwealth Governments. This has led to inter-generational issues and
entrenched disadvantage.

The closure of the Hazelwood Power Station in March 2017 confirmed that the
economy of the Latrobe Valley is changing. As with any significant structural change,
there is considerable debate about the best ways for this transition to occur. In July
2016 Latrobe City Council held a Community Conversation entitled “Securing our
Economic Future’. Since then Council has been working with the Latrobe Valley
community to deliver on the vision and initiatives for transition which emerged from
that conversation.

It is clear that this transition must be vastly different to that executed at the time of
privatisation. Our view is that the key to success is a community led response which
empowers, builds capacity, resilience and optimism within the community. This can
only be done through an earnest desire to partner with the community in a process of
co-design and collective engagement. Our document, Latrobe City: a Strength-Led
Transition (Latrobe City Council, December 2016) sought to clear away the shock
and fear following the closure of the Hazelwood Power Station and set about building
a foundation for economic growth. We are currently in the process of refreshing this
document - to build on the work of our original document while maintaining the
integrity of the initial platform. Our clear aim remains to recognise the desires,
hopes, ideas and aspirations of our community in moving forward.

Regional capital cities in Australia

Australia is home to fifty-one regional capital cities. Latrobe City is the only regional
city located in south-east Victoria.

In Australia, four million people live in a regional capital; and another four million
surrounding residents depend on our regional cities every day.

Regional capital cities are big players in regional economies all over the nation,
contributing $225 billion every year to Australia’s economy.

Regional capital cities are growing quickly. A quarter of regional capitals are growing
faster than the national average.

Latrobe City Council is a member of Regional Capitals Australia, which is an
advocacy organisation comprising thirty-one regional capitals around Australia.

Regional Capitals Australia has a strategic alliance with the Regional Australia
Institute, which provides a strong evidence base for its policies.

Regional city hubs and hinterland spokes

Regional city hubs and hinterland spokes (Regional Australia Institute/Regional
Capitals Australia, December 2017) used evidence from Australia’s regional capitals
to identify the relationship between hubs and spokes for access to jobs and essential
services for economic development.
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45

This report revealed the following facts about the relationship between regional hubs
and spokes:

1. Regional city hubs connect with each other and their hinterland spokes in a
network through infrastructure (e.g. roads) and functions (e.g. jobs and
service access);

2. If regional city hubs provide better services access (health, tertiary education
and finance) their hinterland spokes generally also provide better local access
to services;

3. Larger population hubs tend to have better access to services and so do their
hinterland spokes; and

4. More remote regional city hubs tend to have poorer access to services and so
do their hinterland spokes.

Regional cities and regional development

A key contention included in the report, “Blueprint for investing in City Deals: Are You
Ready to Deal?’ (Regional Australia Institute, June 2017) is that we need our
regional cities to perform well if Australia is to prosper. That same report suggests
that Regional Cities have the potential to produce $375 billion in output, cementing
their 15% contribution to the national economy.

Regional Cities are now explicitly part of the Australian Government's City Deals
program, a cross portfolio, government investment approach with local transparency.
(Regional Australia Institute, June 2017).

It is suggested that there are some essential ingredients which are required to enable
regional cities to succeed and grow consistently over time. (Regional Australia
Institute, April 2016). These include:

e High rates of connectivity through physical and digital infrastructure so that
firms and people can readily connect with others;

e Strong human capital able to support a density of high paying jobs that
attracts the best talent and ensures that business and institutions in the region
are capably led;

e One or more globally competitive specialisations that enable the city to
become embedded in domestic and global supply chains and develop firms
and innovation orientated organisations that enable the city to capture growth
opportunities over time;

e The type of amenity that makes a city a place where people want to be for the
long term so that existing citizens remain committed to spending their lives
and careers in that city and others are attracted to join them; and

e Anetwork of high capacity institutions so that the city can capably and
proactively act to develop itself.

 

GARY VAN DRIEL
Chief Executive Officer
