Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 46

Committee Secretary
Senate Economic References Committee: inquiry into regional inequality in Australia
Department of the Senate
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA

29 April 2018

The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Thank you for the opportunity to make a submission to the inquiry. I am afraid I have not had time
to prepare a detailed response to each of the sub-topics, but will focus on some broad principles and
issues that I believe underpin the development of more detailed policy responses.
Although I am the Director of the Cities Research Institute at Griffith University and a founding
member of Regional Development Australia, Gold Coast, this submission is made in a personal
capacity.
First, I believe there some important definitional points to be made. As I have noted in previous
submissions, ‘region’ and ‘regional’ are terms used in Australian policy debates often with different
meanings. While it is commonplace to use ‘regional’ to refer to non-urban or rural areas and to
remote areas of the country, in my view it is better to limit it to fairly broad-scale areas that typically
comprise a number of local government jurisdictions and which themselves amalgamate up to a
State or Territory. There are various ways of defining and delineating these regions, although two of
the most common are functional economic regions (sometimes similar to travel to work areas) and
river catchment regions (exemplified by jurisdictions of Catchment Management Authorities). Most
importantly, these regions, especially the first type, can be predominantly urban or rural and indeed
are most likely to contain a mixture of urban and rural landscapes.
The second definitional point refers to the notion of ‘inequality’. Economic geographers have long
spoken of uneven development as an empirical reality, especially but not exclusively under capitalist
systems. In this case, for a variety of reasons including underlying geographical features and
attributes as well as historic patterns of development and policy impact, we should expect to see
uneven or unequal patterns of social and economic development. Indeed a national pattern of
development that revealed a very high degree of similarity would not be highly unusual, but would
suggest a degree of top-down or central control of development that was incompatible with the
operation of a liberal democracy and a federal system of government. In other fields, the notion of
inequality is contrasted with that of inequity, once a set of value judgements is applied to a
description of inequality. In this case it is important to understand the causes of unequal or uneven
regional development patterns and then to determine whether or not (or the extent to which) they
represent an inequitable or unfair outcome.
Second, I remain sceptical about the capacity of policy interventions to fundamentally alter patterns
of uneven development, which are themselves the product of a combination of underlying
geographical attributes, the operation of market forces in housing and labour markets, and a degree
of policy-informed investment. This is not to say that policy interventions in the form of overall
1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 46

public investment decisions and explicit ‘regional policy’ measures are insignificant or irrelevant, but
that their impact is at best marginal.
In my view, there is a significant role for government policy interventions (in a more coordinated
manner across all three levels) in helping any region (as defined above) capitalise on its locational
advantages, assuming it has some! Some towns emerged in the past when their locational
advantages were significant, but are no longer so. In these cases, no amount of intervention can
change this and there is little chance of any significant return on that investment. It is interesting to
note that the suggestion made a some years ago that continued investment in some Indigenous
settlements was ineffectual and represented little more than ‘a lifestyle subsidy’, could be applied
equally to many small towns in rural areas that are struggling to remain viable.
One possible way forward might be to develop a systematic and rigorous hierarchy of settlement
types that could then be used to in the assessment of infrastructure and public investment
decisions. This could then form the basis of a plausible national urban policy that in turn would help
in policy debates about how and where an expanding Australian population might be
accommodated, where they might expect to find employment and what level and quality of public
services they could expect. In this pubic investment could be used to stimulate growth in particular
areas and to respond to growth that is occurring ‘naturally’.
Ad hoc calls to support particular small towns to grow, or indeed for small cities to become bigger
will of course continue to be made, but if the response of all levels of government is similarly ad hoc,
then accusations of pork barrelling will be difficult to refute and the overall legitimacy of
government (in general) will continue to decline.
Yours

Professor Paul Burton

2

