Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

Airbnb Submission
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Inquiry into the indicators
of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Summary
•

We believe that everyone in the community must have the
opportunity to share in the benefits of tourism.

•

The sharing economy helps to build resilient communities where
locals can create supplemental income and robust economies that
are supported by increased visitation and spending by Airbnb
guests in areas that do not traditionally benefit from the tourism
dollar.

•

Our platform connects people through human-to-human hospitality,
a process that cannot be automated and replaced by robots.

•

In Australia, a majority of unique Airbnb listings and a majority of
guest arrivals are in regional areas. In 2016 Airbnb hosts in regional
Australia earned $287 million in income in 2016 and welcomed
more than 1.7 million guests into their homes.

•

Airbnb supports the visitor economy in regional communities to
better manage significant surges in demand for accommodation,
such as during major construction or infrastructure projects or
during major events.

•

Harnessing under-utilised space in homes can help build resilient
communities that are more responsive to change and which
promote sustainable tourism.

•

Improving digital literacy is key to the successful, innovative, and
technologically savvy industries of the future, including the visitor
economy, and extending the opportunities of the sharing economy
to more individuals.
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

About Airbnb
Founded in August of 2008 and based in San Francisco, California, Airbnb is a
trusted community marketplace for people to list, discover, and book unique
accommodation and experiences around the world.
Our company and the Airbnb community are leaders in the new sharing
economy, a movement that will represent a significant part of the world’s
future economic growth. Millions of hospitality micro-entrepreneurs are now
empowered to help make ends meet using their underutilised assets or by
sharing their passions. This movement is distributing economic opportunities
across diverse neighbourhoods and providing millions of people with a trusted
platform they can use to benefit their families, earn additional income as hosts,
or find unique lodging opportunities and travel experiences as guests.
Since 2008, more than 300 million guests have arrived at more than 5 million
Airbnb listings worldwide, enjoying a safe and positive experience on Airbnb.
We have worked hard to provide tools and resources that promote
transparency and trust, and we are proud to be a global leader in providing
education on these issues for our community.
Simply put, Airbnb allows anyone to belong anywhere. Our platform helps
strangers experience a city as a local does and lets hosts become
ambassadors for the communities they love, using communication, payment,
and trusted tools to empower users around the world.
The Airbnb community in Australia
Airbnb’s community has continued to grow into a significant presence in
Australia, and it plays an increasingly vital role in the visitor economy. Airbnb
Homes is used by a broad spectrum of hosts, including hospitality
entrepreneurs, ranging from people who make extra income from sharing
space in their own homes, to the long established holiday letting industry, even
to traditional accommodation providers who increasingly list their businesses
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

on our platform. Airbnb Experiences is used by hosts who are creatives,
artisans, and small businesses as an online platform to share their passion with
the world and unlock their time and potential to create new economic activity.
In 2017, our Homes community welcomed over 5 million guests across the
country -- both domestic and international travellers. There are currently over
137,900 active Airbnb listings in Australia, and in 2017 the average Airbnb host
in Australia earned $5,200, supporting hosts to earn supplemental income
from sharing their spare space. Since being launched in March 2017 and
November 2017 respectively, there are currently over 200 Experiences in
Sydney and Melbourne.
The sharing economy helps to build resilient communities where locals can
create supplemental income and robust economies that are supported by
increased visitation and spending by Airbnb guests in areas that do not
traditionally benefit from the tourism dollar. This is especially important in
regional communities which may not have adequate accommodation
infrastructure to support the visitor economy, or may not be able to attract
investment to build new accommodation and plan for growth of the visitor
economy. Our platform connects people through human-to-human hospitality,
a process that cannot be automated and replaced by robots.
With annual seasonally adjusted wage growth rising at a moderate 2.0%
through to September 2017, 1 more Australians are turning to sharing their
homes or their passions in order to make extra income. Hosting on Airbnb is an
economic lifeline -- in 2017, 48% of Airbnb hosts in Australia said that sharing
their spare space helps them afford to stay in their homes, 45% of Airbnb
hosts use their Airbnb earnings to make ends meet, and 6% of hosts report
that hosting helped them avoid eviction or foreclosure. Whether that goes
towards paying off the mortgage, keeping up with the cost of living, or

1

http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6345.0.
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

allowing hosts to more fully participate in their community -- hosting is
important for building economic resilience for individuals.
Airbnb’s contribution to the Australian economy
The growth and mainstream adoption of the sharing economy is leading to
fundamental changes in how people travel and experience destinations,
opening up possibilities to build a robust and resilient visitor economy. These
trends are resulting in increased travel, increased spending, and increased
engagement with different parts of a city than visitors have typically visited,
supporting retail and other small businesses.
Airbnb’s community is an important contributor to the Australian economy. A
recent report by Deloitte Access Economics -- Economic effects of Airbnb in
Australia2 -- found that in 2015-2016 Airbnb guests who stayed in Australia
spent $2 billion, which supported 14,409 jobs, including more than 3,700 jobs
in regional areas in brick-and-mortar businesses such as cafes, restaurants, and
retailers, and contributed $1.6 billion to Gross Domestic Product.
In addition to visitor spending, the home sharing economy is supporting the
growth of ancillary services -- such as domestic cleaning and property
management -- to support hosts who prefer to engage professional services to
manage their listings and bookings.
Beyond Cities: How Airbnb supports rural revitalisation
In June 2017, Airbnb released our report Beyond Cities: How Airbnb supports
rural revitalisation3 which provides a global perspective on the ways in which
remote, rural, and regional communities benefit from home sharing. The report
found our community’s growth was driving the revitalisation of regional
communities without the cost or delay of having to build any new
https://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/economics/articles/economic-effectsairbnb-in-australia.html/.
2

3

https://australia.airbnbcitizen.com/beyond-cities-australia/.
5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

accommodation, attractions, or amenity. In Australia, a majority of unique
Airbnb listings and a majority of guest arrivals are in regional areas. In 2016,
Airbnb hosts in regional Australia earned $287 million in income and
welcomed more than 1.7 million guests into their homes. Through the creation
of new revenue streams for Australians living in regional Australia, as well as
boosting tourism in non-metropolitan areas, the sharing economy is helping
local communities diversify their economies and reducing their exposure to
downturns in traditional, volatile sectors such as agriculture and mining.
Innovation and infrastructure
Without the cost or delay of having to build new accommodation, Airbnb
supports the visitor economy in regional communities to better manage
significant surges in demand for accommodation, such as during major
construction or infrastructure projects or during major events. Airbnb provides
an online tool for event organisers to provide more accomodation options in
more locations for event participants, which can help both event organisers
and towns and cities manage influxes of visitors during those times. 4
A study by the World Economic Forum and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology found during the 2016 Summer Olympic Games, Rio de Janeiro
would have had to build 257 hotels to accommodate the number of Games
attendees who instead used Airbnb. The report found that the “‘elastic supply’
that home sharing can provide offers significant benefits not only in terms of
accommodation for visitors, but also in terms of material and emissions
savings”. 5
Locally, communities in regional Australia rely on the elastic supply of
accommodation made available to visitors travelling for major events, such as

4

https://www.airbnb.com.au/events.

5

World Economic Forum 2016, Understanding the Sharing Economy, p. 5.
6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

the Bathurst 1000 and the Tamworth Country Music Festival which experience
significant surges in guest arrivals during these events.
Harnessing under-utilised space in homes can help build resilient communities
that are more responsive to change and which promote sustainable tourism.
Unlike traditional accommodation providers, which are stymied by long lag and
lead times to address lack of supply, Airbnb’s elastic supply or surge capacity
provides solutions for regional communities without the cost or delay of
building traditional accommodation, and helps attract and host more people
during major events.
Hospitality micro-entrepreneurs including niche B&Bs and boutique hotels
have turned to listing their inventory on the Airbnb platform to offer the kind of
local, unique and authentic travel experiences that Airbnb is known for. This
provides traditional accommodation providers with global exposure, which is
especially important for regional accommodation providers who can now
access a global community of travellers.
The future growth of the sharing economy and the jobs of the future that rely
on digital infrastructure can be supported through increased investment in
Internet infrastructure. Growth in the digital economy has placed extra
pressure on Australia’s Internet infrastructure and will require investment to
ensure that the opportunities and growth into the future are not impeded by
slow speeds or connectivity instability. We would encourage a bipartisan
approach to Australia’s Internet infrastructure, to ensure that Australians (and
visitors to Australia) have access to world class Internet speeds.
Building human capital and enhancing local workforce skills
Our platform uses technology to empower people, not replace them. At a time
of growing uncertainty and economic inequality, Airbnb is democratising
capitalism and creating economic opportunities for everyday Australians, using
technology to help connect and empower our community -- not replace it.
7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

Airbnb believes that the world can become a fairer place to live and work. In
times of profound technological change, we take seriously our obligation to
contribute in a way which ensures that all people’s basic rights are recognised,
and that the dividends of economic change driven by technological
advancements are shared by society.
Airbnb’s technology empowers people to create supplementary income -whether by sharing spare space in their home through Airbnb Homes, or
sharing their unique insights and skills through Airbnb Experiences -- and our
hosts are at the centre of everything we do. Importantly, through every step of
the process of listing a Home or an Experience through Airbnb, hosts are
empowered and in control of their business, including describing their listing,
deciding the nights their Home is available or the times they list their
Experience, and, importantly, the amount that is charged to guests for booking
their Home or Experience. In other words, Airbnb’s human hosts set their price,
not an algorithm.
Airbnb’s 2018 Hospitality Index, based on the number of 5 star guest reviews
from local and international travellers in locations with over 1,000 trips taken in
the last 12 months, found that the most hospitable destinations across
Australia were all regional locations across Queensland, New South Wales, and
Victoria. 6
The top ten most hospitable destinations for travellers in Australia are:
•

Tamborine Mountain, Queensland

•

Berry, New South Wales

•

Nambour, Queensland

•

Kangaroo Valley, New South Wales

https://press.atairbnb.com/gday-and-kia-ora-australia-and-new-zealands-mosthospitable-destinations-revealed/?region=Australia%20and%20New%20Zealand.
6

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

•

Lismore, New South Wales

•

Woolgoolga, New South Wales

•

Sawtell, New South Wales

•

Sunbury, Victoria

•

Bowral, New South Wales

•

Castlemaine, Victoria

Realising the economic opportunities of the future in the regional visitor
economy will depend on a suite of skills and proficiencies to participate in the
new economy. To leverage the hospitality of regional communities and support
emerging enterprises made available by technological change, improving
digital literacy is key to the successful, innovative, and technologically savvy
industries of the future, including the visitor economy, and extending the
opportunities of the sharing economy to more individuals.
Investment in digital literacy skills is particularly important for regional areas
which face a series of significant, intertwined social and economic challenges,
including the stubborn gap in income, employment and economic opportunity
between the city and the country, exodus of people -- particularly young
people -- leaving in search of better opportunities and services, the increasing
frequency and severity of extreme weather events such as floods and
droughts, and the dependency of local businesses and economies on volatile
commodity markets.
There is scope for the Commonwealth Government to investigate
opportunities to partner with industry to deliver digital literacy workshops in
targeted locations throughout Australia, including a focus on regional,
Indigenous, and culturally and linguistically diverse communities. By partnering
with industry, there is opportunity to provide resources and content for the
training of hospitality entrepreneurs and upskilling so that citizens can
participate confidently in the sharing economy. In India Airbnb has signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with the Indian Government to train 50,000
9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 47

hospitality entrepreneurs. In addition, the NSW Government recently
announced an Australian-first pilot program with NSW Seniors Card holders to
become an Airbnb host and which includes a series of free digital literacy
workshops in Manly, Parramatta, Liverpool, Penrith, Orange, and the South
Coast.7
We look forward to working with the Commonwealth Government in relation
to these issues, and would be pleased to engage further with the Economics
References Committee if that is helpful to the Committee’s deliberations in this
Inquiry.
Sincerely,

Brent Thomas
Head of Public Policy, Australia and New Zealand
Airbnb

https://www.airbnbcitizen.com/income-doors-open-for-nsw-seniors-cardmembers/.
7

10

