Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 48

Senate Standing Committee on Economics
The Indicators of, and Impact of,
Regional Inequality in Australia
Inquiry Submission: Regional Development Australia ACT
30 April 2018
Regional Development Australia (RDA) ACT
RDA ACT is one of 52 organisations that make up the national network of RDA Committees.
Committee members are regional leaders who work with all levels of government, business, and
community groups to broker and support economic development opportunities for the ACT region.
Terms of Reference
a) Fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels
b) Improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies
Setting effective government policy needs to be separate from politics. RDA ACT is
administered and funded by the Federal Government to support the economic development
of the ACT Region. However, the divergent political agendas of the Federal and ACT
Governments raises challenges for RDA ACT.
For example, RDA ACT has for many years been working to advance the economic
development of the ACT region through progressing the renewable energy policies of the ACT
Government against a backdrop of energy policy uncertainty at a national level. This industry
is a comparative advantage of the ACT region, and thus provides sound opportunities for new
jobs, regional investment and business growth.
Also reference comments on the i) Decentralisation Policies below whereby the differing
agendas of the Federal and ACT Governments raises a conflict of interest for RDA ACT.
c) Regional Development policies
Regional Development Australia plays a key role in linking the Federal Government’s policies
and programs into State/Territory and Local Government agendas. RDAs also facilitate
communication links, both by sharing Federal Government messaging across the other two
tiers of government, and also by reporting back to the Government on a regional scale.
There is currently unequal opportunity for the ACT Region to access Federal Government
regional development program funding given Canberra is being classed as a ‘major capital city’
and thus is deemed ineligible e.g. the $272.2m Regional Growth Fund and the $481.6m
Building Better Regions Fund.
Canberra is quite different to Australia’s major metropolitan cities, having a relatively small
population and not identifying with the issues caused by the urban density of the major
metros. Rather, one of Canberra’s key roles is to be the Hub for its surrounding south east
NSW region. Any negative economic impact on Canberra has a flow-on effect to the broader

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 48

region population of ~400,000 people who access the ACT’s centrally located health and
education services, airport, retail, cultural and employment opportunities.
c) Infrastructure
Inequity between the ACT region and its surrounding south east NSW region can be addressed
by improving road access into Canberra from the broader region.
Provision of efficient rail services to move freight and passengers between Canberra and
regional centres within NSW and beyond would also address the disadvantage of the rural and
remote regions in accessing employment, tertiary education and specialist services.
Establishing a Freight Hub at the Canberra Airport would facilitate regional producers’ access
to international markets.
e) Education
f) Building human capital
g) Enhancing local workforce skills
RDA ACT has been working with the Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT) and the region’s
renewable energy industry to broaden the CIT’s course offering to include units that are
specifically relevant to the local industry, with course content informed by industry.
This approach could be successfully replicated in other regions, facilitating a stronger role for
TAFEs in presenting training that is particularly tailored to a region’s skills needs.
h) Employment arrangements
RDA ACT has been working with the University of Canberra and RDASI to enable ‘smart
working’, the facility to work from home or in Smart Work Hubs that can be established in
smaller regional towns.
Rather than needing to commute long distances into major cities, Smart Hub workers can
operate productively from a centralised workplace, still enjoy the advantages of networking,
and have access to reliable internet connectivity and in some cases, to shared services e.g.
teleconferencing facilities, meeting rooms, kitchen.
i) Decentralisation policies
When considering the decentralisation of jobs, it is important to take into consideration the
economic impact on the cities from which the jobs are being taken. This can be positive when
decentralising jobs out of Melbourne and Sydney, large congested cities of some five million
people.
However, decentralising jobs out of Canberra is estimated to damage the Canberra economy
significantly, and will have a flow on effect into the broader region whose many residents rely
on the ACT to access employment opportunities.
j) Innovation
k) Manufacturing
l) Any other related matters

