Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 49

Senate Inquiry into the Indicators of and Impact of, Regional
Inequality in Australia
The Southern Downs Regional Council is pleased to submit to this Senate Inquiry. The Southern Downs
is a relatively new Local Government Area in Southern Queensland. It is two hours from Brisbane and
one hour from Toowoomba. It has a population of 35,622, which has maintained relatively positive
population growth until recently. The demographics in the Southern Downs are similar to most
regional towns in Australia; it has a relatively low SEIFA score of 937 in 2016.
The Southern Downs does have compelling advantages, which the Council is promoting; it is very
affordable, it is on three major highways and it is very close to Brisbane. While the Region does have
many advantages it does experience relative disadvantage when compared to larger neighbouring
centres.
It is noted that there are significant inequalities across Australia and particularly in Regional Australia.
The gap appears to be widening with Rural and Regional Australia experiencing a rapidly ageing
population, low levels of population growth and a decline in average wages.
“An analysis of the resident workers individual income levels in the Southern Downs Regional Council in
2016 compared to Australia shows that there was a lower proportion earning a high income (those
earning $1,750 per week or more) and a higher proportion of low income persons (those earning less
than $500 per week). Overall, 7.6% of the resident workers earned a high income, and 24.0% earned a
low income, compared with 19.2% and 17.7% respectively for Australia. “(.id 2018)
One of the first comments the Southern Downs Regional Council wishes to pose is, “What is Regional?”
At the recent Commonwealth Games, the City of the Gold Coast proudly espoused that it was the first
Regional City to host the Games. The Gold Coast is the second largest local government in Australia
behind Brisbane and is home to 576,918 people and yet it is considered Regional. Similarly the
Moreton Bay Region and Sunshine Coast, north of Brisbane are considered Regional, both with
populations nearing 400,000. Finally Townsville at 190,000 and Toowoomba at 160,000 are also
considered Regional. All of these wonderful cities compete in the same funding pools as communities
such as the Southern Downs, which has 35,622 residents. By virtue of the size of the larger Regional
centres, there is more capacity for these organisations to prepare competitive bids for funding. Smaller
communities such as the Southern Downs do not have the capacity or available funds to prepare
funding bids to match those of our larger colleagues, yet are in the same competition. This very fact
creates inequality in the split of contestable funding and smaller communities are the losers.
It is submitted that certain aspects of Regional inequality must be recognized and where possible use
these to the Region’s advantage. Cities have grown, providing more experiences, more mobility and
excitement. By virtue of their size, modern cities have become self-sustaining and have built diverse
economic and social ecosystems that ensure their existence. The diversity of cities provides
opportunities for employment and learning, which lures people away from Regional areas, thereby
leaving the Regions with static or shrinking populations.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 49

Page 2 of 5

This is not a unique problem to Australia, much of the developed and developing world is experiencing
inequality in the same way. It is a factor of globalisation and automation but there is no panacea to
address it. There are some actions that can be taken to try to attract jobs and a younger population
back to Regions, and these need to be given a higher priority but it will not redress nor reverse the
migration trend to cities. What it will do is keep smaller communities viable for longer. Some of these
priority areas include but are not limited to; decentralising some government functions, renewed
funding models for financial assistance grants for community infrastructure, migration policies, and
business and industry policies that encourage food processing closer to the point of production.
Decentralisation
The Southern Downs Regional Council submitted to the Inquiry into Regional Development and
Decentralisation in August 2017. In this submission the Council asserted that the decentralisation of
certain government functions into appropriate Regional Communities would generate much needed
economic stimulus into these communities through wages and population increase. The Council stands
by these assertions; certain government functions such as call centres and administration functions can
easily be located in Regional communities, which will help to provide the well-paid population that will
assist the community to grow. The figures listed above regarding the average wages earned in the
Southern Downs community provide evidence that an injection of public service workers and wages
will have a positive effect almost immediately because there will be more residents with more
disposable income. This will be a similar outcome in many Regional Australian communities. In the
submission in August, the Council conceded that not every community would be suitable to host a
government function but for those that are suitable, it will have a very positive outcome.
Renewed Funding Models
The Southern Downs Regional Council submits that the Financial Assistance Grant system is
inequitable. Council concedes that larger centres and cities will attract larger amounts of infrastructure
spending because they service many more people, however the current system does not seem to
consider the cost of doing business in Regional communities or the amount of external use our
infrastructure supports.
An example of this is the Southern Downs back-packer population. Council knows that the Region hosts
approximately 8000 back-packers each year, who help in the Region’s horticultural sector. The backpackers are in the Region for approximately six months each year; they use the community’s water and
waste water, the libraries, parks and roads. In the latest census the estimated number of overseas
visitors was 222 people (ABS Census of population and housing 2016). The Financial Assistance Grants
are calculated on estimated residential population, which includes the number of overseas visitors.
The Southern Downs is a short-break holiday destination servicing South East Queensland, in 2016 the
Region hosted more than 822,000 (TRA 2016), visitors, which is approximately 16,000 every week, and
this extra demand is not included in the grant calculations either. What this means is that the Region’s
infrastructure is experiencing much higher demand than the estimated residential population suggests,
and it also means that it is the residents who need to foot the bill for public infrastructure to support
the visiting population.
This issue is not unique to the Southern Downs; other holiday destinations have the same problem. Flyin-fly-out communities also experience inequities in grant calculations, this issue needs to be resolved
to allow Regional communities better access to funds for vital infrastructure.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 49

Page 3 of 5

As mentioned earlier, the Southern Downs competes with much larger, better resourced local
governments, for contestable funding. The Southern Downs has a good relationship with the State
government and is grateful for the recent grants from the State under the Works for Queensland
program, Building Our Regions and Local Government Subsidies Program. The Works for Queensland
program has been particularly beneficial for Council because there was no need for matching funding.
Council would like to see more funding like this, and have the funds available for projects in the current
financial year and budget, rather than for projects that are planned for the next few financial years.
Funding in Regional communities is vital for the provision of basic services, which maintain livability and
keeps residents living in the Regions. To help local governments in truly Regional areas, a reassessment
of the way grant programs are calculated and/or administered. Truly Regional Councils must deliver
services over greater distances, which adds to the cost and quality of delivery. A more equitable share
of funding to the local government sector in Regional Australia will go some way to addressing
inequities in Regions.
Immigration Policies
One of the main contributing factors to inequity in Regional Australia is a declining and ageing
population. The Southern Downs Regional Council submits that immigration will make a difference to
this trend, particularly for working-aged people with young families. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
some African, Middle Eastern and European cultures that settle in Regional communities initially tend
to stay there while some other cultures venture directly to capital cities. The Southern Downs has a
small but well integrated migrant community dwelling here already. As mentioned earlier the Region
hosts some 8000 back-packers each year, predominantly from South East Asia, and the Region grew in
the 1950’s and 60’s through inbound migrants from Europe. The Southern Downs Region as an example
would welcome more migrant settlement. The Council is aware that this concept has a number of
issues within it and is willing to work with the Commonwealth to investigate immigration policies to
help to grow Regional populations. If the population of Regions can be increased with younger,
working-aged people, it will help to alleviate some of the inequity.
Business and Industry Policies and Planning
In past centuries and decades the Regions of Australia provided the lion-share of the contribution to
GDP, through agriculture and mining. Many of the jobs that were in agriculture in the past have now
been automated; farms have been consolidated to ensure economies of scale, and it has been the
same in mining. This is coupled with a relative drop in the value of the produce. The Australian case
study of becoming more efficient in agriculture and mining is well known but this has come to the
detriment of Regional Australia.
The capital and peri-urban centres are struggling to accommodate growing populations and many of
the traditional industries upon which the cities were founded. Port Botany and Port Melbourne are
now site constrained and have experienced repurposed land use surrounding them. Australia is now
seeing a land use and lifestyle conflict occurring around these traditional industrial lands. The solution
to date has been to push the development further to the city fringes. New developments are expensive
in terms of capital and social and environmental impact. The Southern Downs Regional Council submits
that many Regional Communities are well placed to host industrial re-development rather than break
new ground on the city fringes.
In a similar way to the Council’s assertion regarding government decentralisation, not all communities
will be suited to housing industrial redevelopment and not all industries will need to be relocated but
those that can will contribute considerably to improvement in Regional communities.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 49

Page 4 of 5

The prime example of this argument in South East Queensland is in the intensive livestock sector. In
Australia the consumption of chicken as a protein source is increasing, yet many Councils in South East
Queensland no longer want chicken farms as they are incompatible with residential developments; this
means that the chicken farmers are looking to more Regional locations for their establishments. The
chicken processors prefer that the birds travel less than two hours to their processing plant; the
question is “If the production of live chickens moves west, how will the processors get delivery of their
birds in optimal condition?” One possible solution is to assist the processors to move closer to the
chicken production. This is an over-simplified example but bringing large food processing plants to
selected Regional Communities helps to bring jobs, investment and population back into these
communities while freeing up valuable city land that can be repurposed for residential use. Many of the
Regional centres that would host relocated food processing have much of the infrastructure in place to
accommodate a population increase and the revitalisation of a traditional industry.
To deliver outcomes such as the example will require coordinated business and industry programs and
policies. The Southern Downs Regional Councils submits that there is little coordination of business and
industry programs. Assistance is reactionary and patchy; business and industry agencies do not appear
to coordinate and plan with the agencies that undertake land use planning, social planning or
infrastructure planning. Agencies such as Regional Development Australia (RDA) that have been tasked
to try to provide coordination, lack the imprimatur to actually make a difference.
To this end the Council submits that there is a strong need for better coordination of business and
industry programs that link agencies and deliver real outcomes. Whichever agency is tasked or created
to undertake this, needs to have the authority to plan for the future and demand the cooperation of all
other agencies to achieve the outcomes needed. Agencies also need to have a focus on truly Regional
Australia, not merely the development lobby centered on capital and peri-urban cities. If this were to
come to fruition, the role would have innovation, manufacturing, land use planning, infrastructure
planning, skill development and social infrastructure. The rebuilding of Regional Australia needs jobs in
Regional areas but these Regional areas also need to be good places to live and attractive places for all
members of the community.
Those living in Regional Australia know that it is a great place and worthy of more. For example; house
prices in Regional Australia are significantly lower than those in capital cities. The median house price in
Warwick is circa $260,000, while the same house in peri-urban Brisbane is $517,000, Sydney $1.1M,
and Melbourne $847,000 (REIQ). This means that people can afford to live in Regional Australia.
Regional towns such as those in the Southern Downs have excellent educational facilities and generally
smaller class sizes. There are two universities with presence in the Southern Downs, TAFE and
agricultural research, which cater for higher learning. The Region has first-class sporting facilities, which
were used by Team Cameroon in the lead up to the Commonwealth Games. Regional communities
have active social activities, festivals and events, which is certainly the case for the Southern Downs
and many of our neighbouring Councils. Living in Regional communities is very similar to living in a
suburb of a capital city, residents get to know their local school community, the local shops and the
neighbours; the advantage Regional communities have is a lower mortgage or rent, a shorter commute
to work or school and generally a wider range of affordable housing. In summary, there is less
mortgage stress and more time to live.
In conclusion, the Southern Downs Regional Council submits that inequality in Regional Australia exists,
some of the causes cannot be overcome but there are proactive measures the Commonwealth can take
to redress the inequality. These are: Decentralisation of government functions, revisiting the current
funding arrangements for Regional communities, examining immigration policies to assist with Regional
population growth, and coordinated business and industry policies to assist industrial redevelopment
of Regional communities.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 49

Page 5 of 5

The Southern Downs Regional Council is happy to provide further input into policy formulation
regarding any of the points raised in this submission.
The Southern Downs Regional Council also wishes to extend an invitation to the Committee to hold its
public hearings in either Warwick or Stanthorpe.

