Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

*ili

Local Government Association
of the Northern Territory

LGANT Submission to Senate Economics References Gommittee Inquiry into the indicators
of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Via email to: economics.sen@aph.gov.au

24 April 2018

1.

About this Submission

The Local Government Association of the Northern Territory (LGANT) makes this submission in
response to the above inquiry.
This submission consists of the following parts

Part 1 Background
Local Government and LGANT in the Northern Territory
LGANT's policies on economic and regionaldevelopment

1.1

1.2

Part2 LGANT responses to the inquir¡/s terms of reference

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and
unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas.
Views on the causes of inequality between regions especially between capital
cities and other areas.
Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts.
Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions and towns to proper?
Policy settings which could help address inequality between regions.

Part 3 Recommendations

Part

I

1.1

Background
Local Government and LGANT in the Northern Territory

LGANT:
Exists as a provider of support services, a coordinator of collective effort and an
advocate for its member councils and forms part of the system of local government in
Australia which includes:
Councils
State and Territory local government associations
The Australian Local Government Association
is governed by its constitution and charter
has an Executive Board of nine members drawn from its membership comprising the 17
local government councils established under the Local Govemmenf Acf (the Act) in the
Northern Territory
has a Chief Executive Officer and staff who manage the operations of the organisation
adopts policy positions on a range of issues by resolution amongst members at biannual
general meetings or monthly Executive meetings

o

.
.

o
o
o

o
r

Page |

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

a

is a member of the Australian Local Government Association with two elected members
being members of the Board.

Local Government
Local government provides services and maintains community infrastructure and facilities for
residents and visitors in the Northern Territory within geographical areas where they exercise
responsibility as governments under the Act.
The characteristics of councils in the Northern Territory are depicted in Tables 1 and 2 below:

Table 1
Gouncils
Classification
Munici
Five Northern
Rural Agricultural
Urban RuralSmall
Urban Fringe
Urban CapitalCity
Very Larqe
Small
Litchfield Council
Alice Springs Town
City of Palmerston
City of Darwin
Council
Katherine Town Council

The major characteristics of these councils include:

.
.
.
.
¡
o
.
.
¡

servicing the bulk of the Northern Territory population
headquarters in their local government areas and operating largely in single, relatively
small urban environments
accommodating staff within these environments, usually through individual home
ownership or the private housing rental market
large number of rateable properties
receiving a large portion of their revenue from rates and service charges
(generally above 60 per cent of total revenue) which are linked to growth and
hence these councils are less reliant on government grants
providing core local government services, facilities and infrastructure
a greater capacity to partner with the private sector in the delivery of services
rarely acting as agent of the Territory or Commonwealth governments in the delivery of
services

having socio-economic indexes for their areas which are a mix of advantaged and
disadvantaged

Page | 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

Table 2
12 Northern Territory Regional and Shire Councils by Glassification
and Number of Townshi
Serviced
Rural Remote Large
Rural Remote Medium
Rural Remote Extra Small
Barkly Regional Council
(six towns and one major
centre)
Central Desert Regional
Council (nine towns)
East Arnhem Regional
Council (nine towns, five of
them on islands)
MacDonnell Regional
Council
(13 towns)
Roper Gulf Regional Council
(nine towns)
West Arnhem Regional
Council (five towns)

Coomalie Community
Government Council (Shire two towns and rural areas)
Tiwi lslands Regional Council
(four towns on two islands)
Victoria Daly Regional Council
(five towns)

Belyuen Community
Government Council (Shire
one town)
Wagait Shire (one town)

-

West Daly Regional Council
(three towns)

The characteristics of these councils include:

.
.
.
.
.
o
¡

servicing a smaller portion of the Northern Territory's population over a large land
mass and with all 67 towns serviced having between 200 and 4 000 residents
nearly all have their headquarters in a municipal area
are the largest employers of Indigenous people in remote areas with between 60%
and 80% of total workforces made up of lndigenous people
small numbers of rateable properties with a fair proportion of those (pastoral and
mining tenements) subject to conditional rating
receiving a large proportion - often in excess of 90% - of revenues from government
grants
providing many services on behalf of, or as an agent of, the Territory and
Com monwealth governments
having socio-economic indexes for their areas which are amongst the most
disadvantaged in Australia 'in terms of people's access to material and social
resources, and their ability to parTicipate in society'(Australian Bureau of Statistics,
www.abs.qov.au)

Local government makes a significant contribution to the Northern Territory economy as
collectively councils employ 3000 Territorians, manage and control assets valued at over $900
million and receive and expend over $400 million in the Northern Territory annually.
Page | 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

1.2

LGANT's policies on economic and regional development
LGANT has the following specific policies on economic and regional development:

(a)

LGANT recognises that soundly based economic and regional developmenf rs
fundamental to the wellbeing of communities in the NT.

(b)

LGANT supports councils fostering economic and regional development through a
range of measures such as;

.
o
.
c
.

supporting localþusrness
providing essenfia/ infrastructure and seruices, including through joint
ventures
identifying investmentopportunities
promoting tourism
promoting cultural and recreational resources as an incentive for regional
investment.

(c)

LGANT calls on the Commonwealth and Territory Governments to recognise and
support the role of Local Government in regional and economic development.

(d)

LGANT recognises that where developments impact on lndigenous cultural
heritage, councils must exercise leadership in ensuring that local Aboriginal needs,
aspirations and cultural and spiritual values are taken into account.

(e)

LGANT supporfs the maintenance and extension of electronic information networks

as a means fo facilitate and promote participation in economic and regional
development i n iti atives.

Part2 LGANT responses to the inquiry's terms of reference

2.1

Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and
unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
ln its submission to the recent Senate lnquiry into the Operation, Regulation and Funding of
Air Route Services Delivery in Rural, Regional and Remote Communities LGANT mentioned:
'ln one case, (Barkly Regional Council area) the nearest major centre from which the
councilcan access charter aircraftis 500 kilometres away in Alice Springs.
Charter aircraft has to fly North to Tennant Creek, pick up passengers and then fly on to
a destination in the council area. The council has informed LGANT that chartering
aircraft is now unaffordable for it. When chartering aircraft becomes unaffordable for
organizations it will never be affordable for most individuals'.

The above example is but one of the many transport disadvantages that people in remote
areas endure. Unequal access is evident across a range of areas however, including
employment, facts that are borne out by the Australian Bureau of Statistics as mentioned above.

Page | 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

The Victoria Daly Regional Council recently endorsed some actions calling on the Federal
Government to make provision for housing for councils in remote areas that:
. are performing services such as aged care, child care, Centrelink , night
patrol and sport and recreation which are funded by the Federal Government
. do not have access to social or private housing
. are having to find funds to construct new housing and as well as pay for
essential services infrastructure to connect to it to accommodate employees.

The lack of access to housing (government provided social housing or private rental
housing) leads to unequal outcomes as mentioned above.
Most Northern Territory councils have gravel roads to maintain and of course during the wet
season they can undergo significant adverse changes particularly from severe weather events
such as cyclones. Under National Disaster Relief Recovery Arrangement (NDRRA) guidelines
councils are restricted from accessing funding should they seek to upgrade such roads (still to
that of a gravel road standard!) to make them better able to withstand such events. They are
only allowed to do minimum repairs unless they wish to pay the total cost of upgrades
themselves, which is often not an option. However, for councils with sealed roads they can and
do obtain compensation under NDRRA guidelines for damages to the extent that they can
restore them to previous conditions. This issue is again an example of an unequal outcome for
regional and remote councils.

There is mention in some literature of reductions in government investments in
infrastructure over the past number of decades and how the investments on offer'benefit
sor?re regions but are of considerable disadvantage to others'(Beer, A, Maude, A,
Pritchard, B, (2003) and in some respects these conditions are still present. The North
Australia lnfrastructure Facility, forexample, is unlikelyto be accessed byanyof the lT local
councils in the Northern Territory due in part to the scale of the loans ($50M) on offer and the
types of infrastructure that can be funded (rail, telecommunications, ports, etc.,).
While Northern Territory councils have been able to access three grants under round one of the
B u i I d i ng Better Regions F u nd f or nfrastru ctu re
https://www.business.qov.au/Assistance/Buildinq-Better-Reqions-Fund/Buildinq-Better-ReqionsFund-lnfrastructure-Proiects/fundinq-offers competition for the grants is strong across Australia
(and not just for local government) and if this rate of grant approval for Northern Territory
councils is continued it will be many years before township infrastructure (of the type councils
are responsible for) is up to standard.
i

A significant rise in investment in infrastructure in regional and remote towns is needed
and has been identified:
'there are around 1200 remote communities in Australia. Many lack even basic
infrastructure such as reasonable road access, clean water supp/ies and wastewater
servrces. ..providing remote lndigenous communities with infrastructure seryices af a
level consistent with other communities of a similar size and location rs essenfia/ to the
broader aims of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) 2008 Closing the Gap in
I n d i g e nou s D i sadvantage i n iti ative.' nfrastructu re Austra ia, (20 1 5).
I

I

Page | 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

ln the Northern Territory there is 'under development' and it is a case of infrastructure
catch up' for the majority of the 67 regional and remote towns mentioned in Table 2
above. In some towns there can be no growth in building development due in part to
water infrastructure being at capacity.
'The shortage of housing in regional areas has a detrimental effect on the ability of
busrnesses to attract employees and on regional and state economic grovvth. A number
of regions reported that business growth is being retarded because prospective
employees witt not move to regional areas because of the lack of housrng.' Beer, A,
Maude, A, Pritchard, B, (2003).
Private investment is unlikely to take place in many of the above towns until the
infrastructure is adequate and government has to invest to make it so.

2.2

Views on the causes of inequality between regions especially between capital
cities and other areas
Research of literature provides many examples of unequal access to opportunities in regions
NBN rotl out where the'satellite' solution that will provide broadband to 7%o of
Australians remote from urban areas will provide:
(a) download speeds at a tenth of the speed of their city cousins
uptoad speeds at 10dh of the city fibre-based solution.
This wilt work against real engagement in industry and commerce and limit the
opportunity for the remote parts of Australia to actively contribute into the economy and
provide seryrces to distant markets. This limitation has the potentialto significantly
impede new opportunities for services and new industry in remote Australia and
presumes at the oufsef that remote Australia has nothing to offer at an affordable cost.'
Walker, BW, Porter DJ and Marsh l, (2012).

'...the

(b)

'lnfrastructure deficiencies make it difficult for low productivity/high unemployment
regions to increase productivity. National lnstitute of Economic and lndustry Research
and the Australian Local Government Association, 2017.
'The private secfor is unlikely to become a major provider of infrastructure outside of the
major capitals, and in all likelihood, outside of Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.
Regions, especially the smaller regions, will continually rely upon government providers
for the infrastructure they need.

Governments and policy makers must, once agaín, accept responsibility for the
provision of infrastructure in many of Australia's regíons'. Beer, A, Maude, A,
Pritchard, B, (2003).

2.3

Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
The RegionalAustralia lnstitute, in referencing the social infrastructure in smalltowns of
Australia mentions:

Page | 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

'[But] Australia has not been able to nurture and develop the people who live in
small towns. Ïhese people continue to experience poorer health outcomes than their
fellow Australians. Those living in rural and remote smalltowns have lower life
expectancy, higher rates of drsease or diabetes and the rate of death by suicide is four
times that of cities. The rate of hospitalization from mental health conditions, intentional
self-harm and from drug or alcoholuse rs higher in rural and remote communities as
well.' Bourne, K, Nash, A, (2017).
The economics of this regional inequality can be found in the costs to society. With alcohol
misuse, the following quote is noteworthy in a recent Northern Territory Government issues
paper on the matter:
'in 2004/5 the total social cost of alcohol in the Northern Territory was estimated to be
$642 million or $4197 per adult compared with a nationalcosf esfimate of $943 per
adult.' Whetton S, Hancock J, Chandler N, Stephens N, Karmel C, (2009).

2.4

Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions and towns to prosper?

Regions and towns prosper from having the right levels of investment in economic and social
infrastructure that supports communities to grow.

'The presence of service delivery professionals ís one key way that social
outcomes in a community can be improved. ln turn, there is clear evidence that
improved social outcomes help to susfarn rises rn the income and living standards of
people in a community. Bourne K, Nash A, HoughtonK, (2Q17).
The remote town of Jabiru, East of Danruin, was built in the early 1980's as a 'town of high
amenity' as recommended by the Federal Fox lnquiry which included, amongst other things,
quality social and economic infrastructure that was financed from private (mining company) and
government sources. Since then the town has prospered from private investments in the
tourism industry including those from lndigenous organisations. Although the town will downsize
after 2021 due to the closure of the uranium mine it is well placed to accommodate future
investments because of its economic and social infrastructure.

2.5

Policy settings which could help address inequality between regions

One policy setting that will not address inequality between regions is to leave 'ever¡rthing
to the market'. Government investment in regions is crucial for overcoming inequalities
particularly because they are the main funders of infrastructure.
Srnce market mechanisms will not reduce inequality of economic pertormance between
regions, public policy has a key role in reducing inequality of economic performance
between regions and by so doing maximizing overall economic growth of the nation'
National lnstitute of Economic and lndustry Research and the Australian Local
Government Associatio n, 2017 .

'Government is larger today, has more powers, spends more, has greater
responsibilities and ambitions. lts policy ambit has considerably widened and appears to
Page | 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

be in no danger of being reduced in the future'John Wanna, John Butcher & Benoit
Freyens, (2010) Policy in Action, the Challenge of Service Delivery, 2010, University of
NSW Press Ltd, Sydney, NSW.
The provision of infrastructure does address inequality between regions if implemented
effectively:
'lmprovement in an area's physical and social infrastructure acfs as an important signal
to the private secfor since it demonstrates government's commitment to reviving
depressed areas and acts as a confidence booster for private secfor rnvesfors. lt also
helps fhe depressed areas to retain and attract highly skilled workers who place a
premium on their living conditions.'Harvey Armstrong and Jim Taylor, 1993.

'Equitable access to infrastructure, both economic and social, is vital to the
rejuvenation of regions. A number of studies öoúh in Australia and overseas in
the tast two decades demonstrate the link between the lncreases in infrastructure
i nvestm ent to prod uctivity, outp ut, em ploym e nt and g rovvth.'
ln general, quality infrastructure facilitates economic growth and improves quality
of life by:
reducing production cosfs, including by reducing domestic transaction
cosfs and increasing access to market information;
diversifying production into more productive and higher return activities by
facilitating grovvth of alternative employment and consumption
possibilities; and
raising the population standard of living and welfare.'Commonwealth of
Australia, (2000).

Disadvantaged regions can leverage off more advantaged regions and in some respects
help arrest some of the challenges for the latter regions if there is a regional policy in
place to begin with. The infrastructure and finance policies of governments are
significant drivers for addressing inequality in regions.
'..it is [also] important to support the diffusion of knowledge into hinterland regions and
back from the hinterland regions so that the combination of hinterland and metropolitan
know-how generates innovation: telecommunications and transport are again required.'
National lnstitute of Economic and lndustry Research and the Australian Local
Government Associatio n, (2017).
'Public policy [also] has a key role in reducing inequality within regions by appropriate
tax and income transfer policies' (lbid).
'On of the reasons for having a regional policy is to avoid fhe excessive concentration of
the population in particular areas since fhrs often results in high levels of congestion and
related problems.'Harvey Armstrong and Jim Taylor, (1993).

Page I

I

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

Part

3 Recommendations

3.1

LGANT recommends that the Commonwealth Government examines ways of 'fast
tracking' and increasing the quantum of grants for economic and social
infrastructure investments:
¡ with the Northern Territory Government and with local government
. for regional and remote areas
. that ensures a greater number of towns can have infrastructure which is
commensurate with other parts of Australia.

3.2

LGANT recommends that the Commonwealth Government considers funding
housing for councils in remote and regional areas in circumstances where:
o the Commonwealth is funding programs
o councils are carrying out the programs
. employees of councils do not have access to housing.

3.3

LGANT recommends that the Gommonwealth Government alters the guidelines to
do with National Disaster Recovery Arrangements so that councils can access
funding that assists with gravel roads being upgraded to standards that are
capable of withstanding severe weather events.

3.4

LGANT recommends that the Commonwealth Government supports policies
which nurture people in remote and regional towns and allows for a higher
number of service delivery professionals to reside in them.

3.5

LGANT recommends that the Commonwealth Government works with the
Northern Territory Government to better refine regional development policy which
sees all three spheres of government working better together.

Yours sincerely

Chief Executive Officer

Page | 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 5

References
Australian Bureau of Statistics, (2016), Census of Population and Housing: Socio-Economic
lndexes for Areas (SEIFA) Australia
Beer, A, Maude, A, Pritchard, B, (2003) Developing Australia's Regions, Theory and Practice,
University of NSW Press Ltd, Sydney, NSW.

Bourne, K, Nash, A, (2017), Pillars of communifies; Service delivery professionals in small
Australian towns 1981 - 201 1 , The Regional Australia lnstitute
Commonwealth of Australia, (2000), Time running out: Shaping Regional Australia's Future,
House of Representatives, Standing Committee on Primary lndustries and Regional Services,
Canberra Australia.
Harvey Armstrong and Jim Taylor, 1993, Regional Economics and Policy, PrenticeHall/Harvester Wheatsheaf, Great Britian.

lnfrastructure Australia, (2015) Australian lnfrastructure Audit, Our lnfrastructure Challenges,
Report Volume 1
National lnstitute of Economic and lndustry Research and the Australian Local Government
Association , (2017), State of the Regrons Report 201 7-1 8, Pillars of Regional Grovvth
Walker, BW, Porter DJ and Marsh l, (2012), Fixing the Hole in Australia's Heartland: How
Governmenf needs to work in remote Australia, Desert Knowledge Australia, Alice Springs
Wanna, J, Butcher, J, Freyens B, (2010) Policy in Action, the Challenge of Seruice Delivery,
2010, University of NSW Press Ltd, Sydney, NSW.
Whetton S, Hancock J, Chandler N, Stephens N, Karmel C, (2009) Harms from and Cosfs of
Atcohot Consumption in the Northern Territory, South Australian Centre for Economic Studies,
Adelaide, SA.

Page | 10

