Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51
Founding Members
The Australian Government
The Sidney Myer Fund
Patron in Chief
His Excellency General the Honourable
Sir Peter Cosgrove AK MC (Retd)
Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia
Patrons
Hon. John Anderson AO
Mr Baillieu Myer AC
Lady Southey AC
Chairman
The Rt Hon Ian Sinclair AC

Senate Economics Reference Committee
FRRR Response to Inquiry into the indicators, and impact of, regional
inequality in Australia
The Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal is pleased to provide the following response to the
Inquiry into the indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.

Overview
Over the last 18 years the Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal (FRRR) has provided more
than $70M in charitable grants to community organisations across rural, regional and remote (RRR)
Australia. FRRR sees firsthand the inequities affecting RRR communities through our grant programs
and capacity building; working to address the very broad range of issues facing communities across
RRR Australia.
In making grants to community identified and led initiatives, FRRR is able to work across the
community fabric, filling gaps and facilitating a range of small but significant step-changes that
enable RRR communities to move from surviving to thriving. FRRR encourages the Senate Economics
Reference Committee to consider the important role that Government has in responding to a broad
spectrum of grassroots and community identified needs and opportunities, at scale.

About FRRR
The FRRR was established in 2000 by the Australian Government and the Sidney Myer Fund, to meet
the needs of rural and regional Australia. Its vision is ‘vibrant and adaptive rural, regional and
remote communities’ and its mission is ‘to champion the economic and social strength of Australia’s
regional, rural & remote communities through partnerships with the private sectors, philanthropy
and governments.’
The Foundation’s objective is to promote, for the public benefit, rural and regional renewal,
regeneration and development in Australia in social, economic, environment and cultural areas.
The establishment of FRRR arose out of concern about the economic and social decline that was
taking place in many rural areas during what was a period of extended drought. The creation of the
Foundation recognised the inherent resilience and importance of our regional and rural
communities, their critical role in the Australian economy as agricultural and resource centres, and
the specific needs that they face associated with issues of declining population, remoteness and
equitable access to services, and the social and economic stresses associated with natural disaster
and drought.
The factors that led to the establishment of FRRR in 2000 remain unchanged, as does the need for fit
for purpose funding support to meet the unique needs of rural, regional and remote Australian

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

communities. It is imperative that we continue to support these communities to address issues of
remoteness, population and liveability.
FRRR harnesses the collective investment of government, business and philanthropic organisations
to support rural, regional and remote communities. The organisation was established with a $10M
corpus from Federal Government, plus seed funds from a number of philanthropic bodies to support
FRRR’s granting activity. This has grown to $26M under management, whilst distributing over $70M
in grants. FRRR endeavours to cover the majority of its operating costs through investing the corpus;
enabling us to be a low -cost partner; on average, each dollar administered costs 5-10 cents.
FRRR’s approach is rooted in the tenet that local people are best-placed to know what will make the
greatest difference in their community. For this reason, our focus is on helping communities meet
the needs and aspirations of their people, place and prosperity.
Our goal is to enable rural and regional communities to respond to the needs of:




their PEOPLE - to develop healthy, connected, skilled communities and individuals;
their PLACE - to build vibrant cultures, healthy environments, sustainable social and physical
infrastructure; and
their PROSPERITY - to support sustainable, viable and adaptive local economies that are
inclusive and provide opportunities for economic participation and financial wellbeing.

Our role has been to help FACILITATE community engagement and planning, REMEDIATE and
MAINTAIN community assets, RESOURCE and SCAFFOLD community action and help communities to
INNOVATE. Analysis of those functions indicates that just under 60 percent of the funds that FRRR
has distributed since 2000 has helped resource / scaffold the provision of activity at a community
level ($37M); just under a quarter has been used to help remediate / maintain community assets
and infrastructure ($15M); and just over 10 percent ($7M) has helped facilitate planning and
community engagement activities.

Figure 1: The role played by FRRR FY2000/01 – FY2016/17 ($ distributed)
Most grants that we make are small – over the lifetime of the organisation the median grant is
approximately $4,000. However, in our experience communities leverage grants in cash and / or in
kind at least three times.
FRRR works across the full spectrum of issues and approaches within communities, illustrated in
Figure 2 below.

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

Figure 2: The FRRR Theory of Change

1. Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and
unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan areas
FRRR sees firsthand, through our grant programs and capacity building support, the very broad
range of issues facing communities across Australia. The issues are immense, diverse, complicated
and interconnected. Rural, regional and remote communities have challenges in all areas – they
have limited access to services and goods (technology, transport and health, education,
income/employment opportunities, cultural activities), face issues of social isolation, racism and
cultural diversity, bear the burden of the country’s natural resource management, agriculture and
food production, environmental and sustainability issues, and have the added challenges of
responding to population decline, industrial transition and inward/outward migration.
In many circumstances, FRRR’s grants act to ‘fill gaps’ that in the past have been provided by Local,
State or Federal Government support. In this way, FRRR is acting as a backbone of community
support, one that has relied on philanthropic generosity, and one that carries significant ongoing risk
as many philanthropic partners transition their support to focusing on piloting, innovating, and
investing in proof of concept initiatives. This represents an opportunity for Governments to redouble
their efforts in financially resourcing the needs of communities, in order to allow philanthropic
funding to focus on funding innovative or higher risk responses that enable communities to thrive.
However it is acknowledged that this may not be an efficient use of Government resources and as
such there needs to be coordinated and complimentary effort and appreciation of the role that the
non-government sector can play in working with Governments to address service inequity.
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

Filling gaps - Access to Activities or Services
Since 2000, FRRR has allocated 60 percent or $39M of FRRR’s funds to charitable projects aiming to
improve regional and remote community access to activities or services. This indicates that FRRR’s
funding has contributed to filling a significant gap in access to locally available services and programs
/ activities that enable people to live well in their communities.
It also reinforces the observation that for many rural, regional and remote communities, the
greatest focus of effort is on ensuring that the fundamental service needs of their communities are
met and that new activities are available as need and opportunities arise.
It is important to note that this includes cultural and place-making activities, as well as core services
such as education, health and wellbeing, and support for vulnerable members within communities. It
speaks too, to the strength of local leadership and the importance of funds being available for
programs and services that are locally led and delivered.

Filling gaps - Sufficiency of Community Infrastructure
FRRR has invested heavily in community assets / infrastructure, representing 26 percent, or $17M of
FRRR’s grants. There is a clear linkage between the provision of services and activities and the
availability of adequate and fit for purpose community infrastructure. The emphasis on maintenance
of infrastructure also reflects that this is a responsibility that has fallen to community committees
and indicates just how challenging it is to raise the funds for the upkeep locally.
When the community is responsible for the upkeep of their community hall it becomes quite
a financial burden at times. It is very difficult to obtain funding for projects for these halls as
they are seen as a poor investment. Luckily the communities don’t see it this way and they
strive to make their halls a very proud place in their community.
Without organisations such as FRRR offering these grants, I doubt it would be possible for
town groups to be able to continue the upkeep of these community halls to a standard that is
safe for everyone to use. What I have found when researching is that FRRR is really the only
organisation that supports grants for historical halls. Your process to apply for the FRRR
grants is easy and very simple to follow. To the FRRR - thank you for your support, not only to
allow us to improve our hall, but for the many other community halls that you must support
over the years. It is reassuring that there are organisations that understand that all
communities - large, small and remote - rely on a meeting place for the township and their
surrounding areas to access
- Representative, Banana & District Community Association

Filling gaps - Access to Education
FRRR believes a good education system is at the heart of strong, vibrant rural, regional and remote
communities and has directed support intentionally toward communities that experience
disadvantage due to geography and scale, for projects that assist in redressing the challenges faced
by those communities in resourcing equitable educational opportunities.
Between 2000 and 2016, FRRR made more than 2,400 grants and distributed approximately $16M to
support lifelong learning, education and training initiatives. The Foundation has supported projects
in each state and territory, although there has been a bias in funding towards the eastern seaboard.
However, the Foundation has made grants in a number of remote communities in Queensland, New
South Wales, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
Approximately 20 percent of the funds (21 percent, $3.3M) that have been distributed by FRRR have
been allocated to support early childhood learning and development. Most of those funds were used
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

to support the provision of quality, well-resourced learning environments ($2M) and to supporting
the development of foundation literacy and numeracy skills ($1M).
Just over 70 percent has been allocated to support engagement in school and learning (71 percent,
$11.2M). A significant portion of these funds supported parents and families to help their children to
engage at school and to learn ($5.3M), including both financial support to assist families to set their
children up to attend school as well as initiatives supporting parents to support their child(ren)’s
learning. The funding also supported the provision of quality, well-resourced learning environments
($4M).
In terms of the change mechanism employed, 85 percent of the funds distributed in this area went
to providing equitable access to services / activities ($13.5M). Almost all of the remaining funds
were used to purchase infrastructure or equipment (15 percent, $2.4M). The remaining funds
($5,000) were allocated to support a small number of school / educator-based skill development
initiatives.

Filling gaps – Community and organisational resilience
Approximately a third of all funds distributed supported community and organisational resilience
and capacity building (27 and 6 percent of FRRR’s grants respectively). Just under 20 percent (18
percent) supported projects promoting individual and community health. Smaller allocations were
made to support economic (re)development (11 percent), cultural vibrancy (7 percent) and
environmental sustainability (3 percent). This breakdown has been fairly consistent across the life of
FRRR.

Filling gaps – unmet need
Since 2000, FRRR has received more than 26,000 applications, and granted to just over 8,200
projects. Of the more than 17,800 applications FRRR was unable to fund, the most common activity
for which funds were requested was developing organisation resilience & capacity, with more than
6,440 (or 37%) unmet requests. This was closely followed by requests to support promoting
individual and community health & social wellbeing (3270 applications or 18.8 percent), then
supporting lifelong learning and education (14.6 percent). This is in contrast to the grants awarded,
where the majority went toward education and lifelong learning. These figures reflect the critical
role and deficiency in resourcing of small, mostly volunteer run non-profit organisations in rural
communities. Much of the assistance requested relates to increasing human resourcing capacity,
equipment to support operations and infrastructure, to enable improved services and accessibility.
In many cases projects were not funded simply because there were insufficient funds rather than the
strength or merit of the projects.

2. Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between
capital cities and other areas
Regional Australia is experiencing considerable proportional change in population levels, with many
examples of both growth and decline, both creating needs. Many regional centres, particularly in
resource-rich or high-amenity states, regions and towns, are growing rapidly leading to increased
community demand, stemming from lack of sufficient physical and social infrastructure
development. Conversely, many rural, regional and remote communities have been managing the
challenges of slow rural decline, exacerbated by long term drought and high impact natural
disasters. The social fabric is stretched as individuals struggle to repair their own homes, businesses
and communities. Amidst all of this, technological and economic changes are influencing rural
industries, resulting in large rural adjustment. This has a significant impact on students in rural,
5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

regional and remote areas, with many schools unable to make adjustments and keep up with the
changing needs of students and the community.
The level of socio-economic disadvantage of rural and regional families can also be higher than in
major cities. The negative impacts on youth and family development, levels of community
connectedness and wellbeing, can become intergenerational if not proactively and locally addressed.
Initiatives that support the ideas of youth to be implemented and which engage children and
families in early learning can have long-term educational benefits and help to retain youth in rural
communities. Programs and activities that create opportunities for social connection, mental health
and wellbeing, positive peer relationships, education and meaningful engagement in the future of a
person’s community can have a significant impact on increasing levels of engagement, sense of
belonging and social inclusion, and ultimately prosperity.

Community Context – size and remoteness
FRRR is unique in that we focus our work to support communities who experience disadvantage due
to geography and scale. A challenge for small and/or rural, regional and remote communities is that
due to their very nature of being small and/or non-metropolitan, they have a lower capacity to raise
funds and resources to undertake projects that will benefit them and address the issues they are
facing.
There is no typical community, nor is there a standard profile of what communities of a particular
size are likely to need. Anecdotally, FRRR believes the needs and requests of communities are driven
less by their size and more by factors such as their remoteness, the impact of weather and climate,
the effect of natural disasters and the local economy. However, the Foundation knows that smaller
communities have less fundraising capacity due to their size, and as such their need for philanthropic
support is related to this factor as well as the importance of the issue they are responding to.
Consequently, FRRR’s funding preferences smaller communities. A proportion of FRRR’s grant
programs have only been open to communities with a population under 10,000 people. On average,
from FY2012-FY2016, just 8 percent of FRRR’s grants went to communities of greater than 10,000
people. Where funds are granted to larger regional centres, the people who benefit from the grants
tend to be within a discrete community within that larger centre. Occasionally grants are
administered from a larger regional centre but deliver benefit to a number of smaller communities.
FRRR is aware that remote communities have different needs than communities that are peri-urban
or rural centres. For example, in Central Australian communities or outback Queensland, car hire,
fuel and accommodation can add $5,000 to a budget before anything is even delivered. In Fly In-Fly
Out (FIFO) communities, fewer than average long-term local residents results in fewer volunteers, so
groups may seek funding for staff. Therefore, a considered investment in one or two people can
have strong ripple effects, delivering wide benefit.
FRRR believes that considering the deeper context of each community is paramount when making
funding decisions. Even in what may seem to be less remote areas, there can be challenges. For
example, limited public transport is a major issue impacting on people’s access to employment and
educational opportunities in Tasmania and in western Victoria.

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

Disaster preparedness, response and recovery
The Foundation has also played a significant role in helping regional and rural communities to
prepare for, respond to and recover from emergency and disaster. Since responding to Cyclone Larry
in 2006, FRRR has provided support to more than 418 communities responding to drought, flood,
cyclone and bushfire. This includes support provided for the 2009 Victorian Bushfires, Cyclone Yasi
and the floods that followed it and the Victorian floods, both in 2011, the 2013 Tasmanian and Blue
Mountains bushfires and 2013 Queensland and NSW floods and cyclones, as well as extended
drought relief.
In many places FRRR has provided ongoing support to communities responding to an emergency /
disaster by helping them to address immediate needs post-disaster, as well as longer-term recovery
requirements over time. The Foundation has intentionally done this, as there is often a gap in the
longer-term provision of funding and support, making this an area where philanthropy can play a
significant and strategic role. A key area of support has been the resourcing of services that have
been absent in the longer term recovery such as youth services, soft-edge mental health supports,
and infrastructure improvements to enable better services and community connectedness.

3. Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts
A survey undertaken by FRRR in 2017 of 48 respondent organisations receiving FRRR funding for
economic (re)development related projects affirms the benefits that small amounts of philanthropic
funding can provide in terms of supporting community revitalisation and renewal. Survey
respondents identified a number of direct and indirect benefits flowing from those projects
including:
 Improved liveability of rural towns to retain and attract residents;
 New business / enterprises established and jobs generated;
 Increased industry / business activity and capability;
 New and invigorated events attracting more visitors and promoting tourism;
 Increased community optimism and wellbeing;
 Increased financial earning capability of youth, women and people with disabilities;
 Reduced barriers and increased access to services and learning; and
 Increased community safety and emergency response capacity (in the case of projects
supporting post-emergency / disaster economic recovery).
The economics of regional inequality is a complex and multi-dimensional area for analysis, however
the points above highlight the experience of FRRR that for smaller communities, major economic
adjustment policies and associated resourcing are not always felt or indeed of great benefit to
smaller communities if not linked closely with ensuring that the foundations of economic
development capacity at every level of a community are strengthened. The role of the Regional
Development Australia bodies has great potential as do integrated approaches at the local and
regional level between economic and social indicators such as health, affordable housing, education,
environment, and arts and culture. Integrated approaches have the potential to address challenges
of inequality experienced by those living in rural, regional and remote communities, and drive
economic prosperity.

4. Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions to prosper?
It is FRRR’s opinion, based on 18 years of working with RRR communities, that there are two key
pillars which are requirements if a community is to be in a position to grow. These are: 1) Quality
local infrastructure; and 2) Quality education.
7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

FRRR hears from its grantees that having quality local community infrastructure contributes to a
stronger sense of community pride and identity and plays a key role in attracting new residents,
businesses and visitors. Likewise, quality education is also a pre-requisite for a community to attract
and retain the next generation of residents. Without infrastructure and education strength, a
community faces further inequity.
Importantly, FRRR’s experience has shown that smaller communities can adapt to changing
contexts and thrive, despite the barriers and limitations they experience. However, to do this, a
range of conditions are required and funding support that helps to seed and grow those conditions
is essential. FRRR’s theory of change and focus areas of funding are deliberately directed in this way,
and FRRR’s recent Impact review has generated insights that confirm and encourage this approach.

Case Study – Boyup Brook, WA
Boyup Brook is a small Western Australian community located 269 kilometres south-southeast of
Perth and 31 kilometres northeast of Bridgetown, with a population of 532 (Shire: 1738). The town's
economy is primarily agricultural, including employment at the local grain handling depot.
In recent years Boyup Brook has become a tree change choice for families, particularly those where
the main breadwinner operates on a Fly In-Fly Out (FIFO) mining roster. This has created a strong
need for services and infrastructure to support families (especially mothers) and school aged
children.
FRRR’s support of Boyup Brook
Between 2005 and 2015, the Boyup Brook community received over $48,624 via 13 FRRR grants.
• 21 Requests, totalling of $130,758.
• 13 Grants, totalling of $48,624 granted.
• Via 5 FRRR programs: Back to School, Small Grants for Rural Communities, ANZ Seeds of Renewal,
REAPing Rewards, and Caring for Ageing Rural Australians.
• 8 organisations received funding: Boyup Brook District High School Parents & Citizens Association;
Country Music Club of Boyup Brook WA; Boyup Brook Community Resource Centre; Boyup Brook
Youth Advisory Council; Blackwood Valley Wine Industry Association; Shire of Boyup Brook; Upper
Blackwood Agricultural Society; and Boyup Brook Arts and Craft Club.
• Projects funded ranged from bush poetry events, expanding the Greenbush Discovery Theatrette,
craft clubs, fitness, supporting teens and the Boyup Brook Country Music Festival.
• Beneficiaries: Projects benefited all parts of the community, from school children to seniors, local
businesses to tourists.
Providing grants to the same community over a decade has shown that continued support across
different issues, organisations, and change mechanisms leads to greater sustainability and vibrancy
of those communities. In Boyup Brook, there is now greater confidence and capability to generate
funds from within and beyond the community, and the ripple effect of projects means that the
benefits continue to multiply over time across different parts of the community. Related to this, a
likely contributor to sustainability is also providing funding to different organisations within the
community, rather than only one lead or backbone organisation.

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 51

5. Policy settings which could help address inequality between regions
FRRR has distributed grants across a range of social, economic, and environmental areas. The
majority of its grants are focused on helping communities to address local opportunities and
challenges and to deal with factors of distance, service access and to maintain and build community
cohesion and strength.
Policy settings should incorporate a response to the differing scales and focus of investment
required and a more joined up approach to delivering social and economic investment that doesn’t
call on excessive Government resources but which capitalises on the existing mechanisms for
regional development. Strategic consideration could be given to integration of social and economic
policy through, for example, adjustment of procurement processes to favour either regional
businesses where materials are sourced from regions or suppliers which offer social benefits to
regions such as construction of new housing being inclusive of affordable housing. We understand
that there are such measures in place however this could be strengthened and developed through
an innovation lens.

Conclusion
FRRR’s response to the Senate Economics Reference Committee Inquiry provides information
relating to the level and nature of demand and responses led by rural, regional and remote
communities.
The issues facing RRR communities will continue to be complex and multi-faceted. FRRR remains the
only national philanthropic vehicle dedicated to strengthening rural Australia. Our connection with
communities, our ability to lean in and listen to needs, priorities and issues; and respond with
relevant and fit for purpose grants is incredibly valuable. But, the demand is much, much greater
than FRRR is able to meet.
FRRR would be pleased to discuss any of the information in our response. I can be contacted on

Yours sincerely,

Natalie Egleton
Chief Executive Officer

9

