Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

Rockhampton Regional Council
Submission
INQUIRY INTO THE INDICATORS OF, AND IMPACT OF, REGIONAL
INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
APRIL 2018

This document provides a submission to the Senate Economics References
Committee.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INQUIRY SUBMISSION CONTEXT

2

ROCKHAMPTON REGION OVERVIEW 2
ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF ROCKHAMPTON
A. POLICY SETTINGS: EXAMPLES

3

4

B. POLICY SETTINGS: PUBLIC DECENTRALISATION 5
1. Support for policy of decentralisation 5
2. Support for direct action for regional growth 5
3. Decentralisation can improve collaboration 6
4. Decentralisation is an investment in the regions

7

5. Benefits of locating commonwealth entities in rockhampton 8
C. POLICY SETTINGS: PRIVATE DECENTRALISATION
1. Innovation is welcome here

12

2. Population growth is key

12

3. Giving accelerators and incubators ‘legitimacy’
D. POLICY SETTINGS: TAX TREATMENTS

12

13

1

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

INQUIRY SUBMISSION CONTEXT
Rockhampton Regional Council welcomes this opportunity to make a submission to the
Senate Standing Committees on Economics inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia. We note the Terms of Reference for this inquiry and the
core focus of this submission is on the Committee’s request to hear about “policy settings
which could help address inequality between regions”.

ROCKHAMPTON REGION OVERVIEW
Rockhampton is centrally located in Queensland 40 kilometres inland of the Capricorn
Coast, 620 kilometres North of Brisbane and 720 kilometres South of Townsville.
Rockhampton enjoys over 300 days of sunshine a year. The laid back lifestyle boasts top
class sporting facilities, some of Australia’s most prestigious education centres, exceptional
hospital and health care facilities, award winning tourism and recreational facilities,
gourmet restaurants and signature events. Our outstanding liveability is a key point of
difference, and is featured on our advancerockhampton.com.au/live site that provides
more information.
Rockhampton is strategically positioned within Northern Australia (as defined by the Office
of Northern Australia). Our geographic positioning is particularly significant as
Rockhampton is the gateway to the North and is the government and business hub of the
broader Central Queensland region, including the Central Western Queensland. The
Rockhampton Region services a population of 235,789 persons across Central Queensland
(Source: ABS Regional Population growth, Australia 2014-15, as at 30 June 2015).
Rockhampton has a proud history of having an abundant and affordable water supply.
Thanks to the region’s existing and future strengths in water security “…the significant
potential for further population growth as well as the growth and development of key
industries including agriculture, can be realised” (Source: Rockhampton Regional Water
Supply Security Assessment, Department of Energy and Water Supply, Queensland
Government, February 2016). The region has significant capacity for growth and Council is
working towards an aspirational and viable population growth target of doubling the
population by 2050 (Source: Rockhampton Economic Development Strategy, 2015).
Hundreds of millions of dollars has recently been invested by all levels of government to
fuel explosive growth and significant lifestyle improvements in the Rockhampton Region.

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF ROCKHAMPTON
As the regional capital for the greater Central Queensland region stretching from
Gladstone in the south to Mackay in the north, the Rockhampton Region is a key engine
room of Queensland. The city is traditionally the location of choice for many government
and corporate entities that service this vast and hugely significant economic region for the
national economy. Accordingly when data from the Mackay Region is taken into account
an additional population base of 182,299 persons and GRP of $14.930 billion can be
factored in to the overall social and economic significance of this greater Central
Queensland region that incorporates the Bowen Basin coal industry, vast agricultural
interests, the industrial and energy powerhouse of Gladstone and some of Australia’s
busiest ports (Sources: ABS Population Growth, Australia 2014-15 for Mackay-IsaacWhitsunday SA4 and REMPLAN data for Mackay SD SA4 respectively).
With a Gross Regional Product (GRP) of $16.021 billion the area serviced by the
Rockhampton Region is a strongly significant contributor to the national economy (source:
REMPLAN data for Fitzroy SA4 incorporating ABS June 2016 Gross State Product).
This regional economic significance is reinforced by data on Resident Annual Personal
Income Tax Paid per Year for relevant electorates with Capricornia at $2.1 billion and Flynn
at $1.97 billion (Source: data from ATO fy2013/14 by postcode-Net Tax).

OUR WATER
SECURITY CAN
SUPPLY MASSIVE
GROWTH FOR
AUSTRALIA!

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

A. POLICY SETTINGS: EXAMPLES
The Inquiry calls for submissions regarding “… policy settings which could help address
inequality between regions” and this section addresses this matter by providing comment
in relation to best practice approaches to regional development that can address inequality.
Examples are as follows:
1. Relocate the Freight Task: Decentralisation of the freight infrastructure and
associated tasks can remove constraints in order to deliver step-change boosts in
capacity for subsequent growth of national significance. The best example of an
integrated and ‘future proof’ solution is the Tuas mega-port that is the high-tech
centrepiece of Singapore’s Next Generation Port vision. This port relocation project
is enabling new innovations and capacity to be developed proactively for their
future freight task, and stimulating new growth and development in the process. It
will be transformational for productivity and supply chain efficiencies associated
with the ships, land side operations and distribution opportunities of the future.
Australia needs to be open to a ‘step change’ in our approach across all logistics
infrastructure categories too, if our goods exporters are to be able to compete in the
world. Relocating the freight task out of constrained and limiting capital city
settings is possible in Australia if we learn from such examples of best practice.
2. City Deals: The City Deals model of the UK is an international example of a an
approach to address regional inequality. The method of long term outcome-based
agreements is also commendable, giving an opportunity to hone in on specific
projects to achieve results together. It is significant that Australia has initiated a
City Deal agenda, and the adoption of additional lessons learned from the UK
experience could further enhance these deal making opportunities. Rockhampton
Regional Council is willing to commit to a City Deal, has submitted a proposal to the
Queensland Government, and has engaged with the Federal Government to offer to
partner in order to help expand this best practice initiative.
3. Decentralisation: The historic decentralisation of Commonwealth entities and
facilities to Townsville and Darwin represent another example of highly successful
approaches to regional development, which Council encourages the Inquiry to
consider because of the resulting lasting reductions to inequality for these two
cities.

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

B. POLICY SETTINGS: PUBLIC DECENTRALISATION
1. SUPPORT FOR POLICY OF DECENTRALISATION
We welcome and are strongly supportive of the current Federal Government proposed
policy of decentralisation of Commonwealth entities. The policy, as outlined in the joint
letter from Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce and Senator Fiona Nash will certainly help
reduce regional inequality if it achieves the aim of boosting jobs and genuinely investing in
regional communities. Further to this, we strongly propose the policy will have a marked
positive effect on the ability of Commonwealth entities to perform their functions and lead
to improved economic, environmental and capability improvements of entities.
There is reportedly a growing sentiment that governments both within and outside of
Australia are out of touch with their constituents. Rightly or wrongly there is a belief that
there is a disconnect between centres of government and everyday people. Perceptions
are offered that government is making policy and implementing services and programs in a
“bubble” that is informed in the main by capital city, metropolitan, highly urbanised
demographics that don’t adequately reflect the views, interests and true value of rural and
regional communities. This exacerbates regional perceptions and impacts of inequality.
Relocating Commonwealth entities in regional centres such as Rockhampton would be an
extremely positive and welcomed step towards ensuring that Commonwealth government
presence is not only manifestly displayed by geographic positioning but is also genuinely
engaging with regional Australia to reduce inequality.

2. SUPPORT FOR DIRECT ACTION FOR REGIONAL GROWTH
There is some concern for declining population levels in rural and regional areas. Regional
Australia contributes great wealth to Australia’s economy but many regional communities
struggle with viability and thus the sustainability of continued economic contribution with
the drift of their population to urban areas. In a paper titled “Estimating society’s
willingness to pay to maintain viable rural communities” (Authors: Jeff Bennett, Martin van
Bueren and Stuart Whitten, published in The Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resources Economics, 2004) the authors examine the Australian public’s willingness to pay
to avoid losses of people from rural and regional areas and conclude:
“The results of the two studies presented in the present paper demonstrate that both rural and
urban Australians value the maintenance of rural population levels. This finding is robust in
that it has been replicated for three diverse and geographically separated regions across a
variety of rural, regional and urban populations, as well as in the national context”

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

This reinforces the view that Australians would be supportive of any endeavours to
maintain viability of regional areas, including any initial costs associated with relocating
Commonwealth entities to regional capitals such as Rockhampton. In any case, it is
anticipated that any initial costs would be greatly offset over time by greatly reduced
property and rental costs.

3. DECENTRALISATION CAN IMPROVE COLLABORATION
Regional Capitals Australia’s report on Regional Capital’s Contribution to Australia (Future
role and contribution of regional capitals to Australia Submission 48, April 2015) includes
the following:
“Current regional development funding does not recognise the role of regional capitals as
providing services and infrastructure hubs and gateways to international markets. Moving to
investing in regional capitals based on their strategic importance rather than simply funnelling
funding to outer metropolitan areas choked with congestion would add billions of dollars to
Australia’s economic output.”
International evidence from the OECD (2014) suggests that the following should be
considered in Australia:
•

A focus on local factors as a means of generating new competitive advantages,
such as amenities (environmental or cultural) or local products (traditional or
labelled);

•

A shift from a sectoral to a territorial policy approach, including attempts to
integrate the various sectoral policies at regional and local levels and improve
co-ordination at the national government level;

•

Decentralisation of policy administration and, within limits, policy design to
those levels; and

•

Increased use of partnerships between public, private and voluntary sectors in
the development and implementation of local and regional policies.

Moreover, the effectiveness of public investment in regional capitals could be enhanced by
recognising that: “Effective public investment requires substantial co-ordination among all
levels of government, particularly when there are overlaps in initiatives between governments”
Relocating Commonwealth Departments and agencies would immeasurably increase the
scope for collaborative partnerships, integrated policy development and coordination of all
levels of government. It is our view that this will inevitably provide great benefits to policy

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

and service implementation. It will also maximise opportunities for program responses to
issues and opportunities as they emerge but also to overall efficiencies and competitiveness
in terms of government-enabling initiatives, industry engagement and overall economic
output. Together, this will tackle both drivers and symptoms of regional inequality.

4. DECENTRALISATION IS AN INVESTMENT IN THE REGIONS
It is our strong belief that funding of important infrastructure aside: the best way for
Commonwealth government to tackle regional inequality, develop effective partnerships
and policies and directly contribute to sustained population levels is to locate
Commonwealth entities in regional capitals such as Rockhampton. We propose this will
have a strong positive effect on the economy and functional capability both at regional and
national level as outlined below:
•

The influx of Commonwealth officers and their families to regional centres will
provide extra incomes, local spending, school and university enrolments;

•

The increased presence of skilled workers, professional expertise and experience
will improve the overall skill and education levels and diversity of regions;

•

The placement of Commonwealth entities and their staff and families in regional
areas will enrich the social capital, demographic diversity and exchange of ideas
and perspectives;

•

There will be increased engagement with industry, state and local government
to better inform policy, program development and services;

•

It will enable improved scope for synergies with state and local government
program and policy development and implementation;

•

Commonwealth entities have direct access to attract and recruit personnel from
a diverse range of regionally skilled, industry-seasoned backgrounds;

•

Property and rental costs are greatly reduced in regional areas in comparison to
metropolitan cities thus greatly reducing operational costs;

•

Indigenous people are strongly represented in regional areas such as
Rockhampton and can directly contribute to workforce diversity, cultural
competency and by offering perspectives that will enrich and strengthen policy
and program delivery;

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

•

Industries such as agriculture, mining, manufacturing, health care and social
assistance are more directly or uniquely represented in regional areas;

•

Regional people are seasoned innovators: Commonwealth entities have direct
access to people coming up with real world solutions to real world problems.

5. BENEFITS OF LOCATING COMMONWEALTH ENTITIES IN
ROCKHAMPTON
Locating Commonwealth entities and functions in the Rockhampton Region will deliver
significant benefits to the Commonwealth Government and wider community, while also
reducing regional inequality for the residents of the Rockhampton Region its wider Central
Queensland service area.
5.1 Overview of Benefits
Rockhampton is a strategically strong Region in which to relocate Commonwealth entities.
As the regional capital of a vast industry-diverse and economically important area, growing
this Region provides tangible benefits of national significance for jobs and growth.
Rockhampton is the gateway from the South to Central and Western Queensland,
Northern Australia and the service hub for a vast tract of Queensland. It is well connected
through major highways, rail, airport and nearby sea ports. The Rockhampton Airport in
particular offers great connectivity to Brisbane (a one hour flight) and on to Canberra and
all capital cities and is consistently listed in the top 15 airports in Australia.
Rockhampton has great communications and digital connectivity including through the
NBN which facilitates first class communications and governance arrangements including
videoconferencing, teleconferencing etc. Rockhampton Regional Council has implemented
a Smart Regional Centre strategy and the adoption of technologies unique in regional
Australia. This innovative strategy was recognised with the Economic Development
Australia National 2016 Award for Excellence in the Digital Entrepreneurs category in
October 2016. This achievement followed on from Rockhampton’s selection as the only
regional centre in Australia to host the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet Smart
Cities and Suburbs Roundtable event in September 2016.
Our high-tech agenda reinforces our existing strengths in research and development. We
offer a prime location for related government teams, agencies and cooperative research
centre investments and relocations.

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

Reflecting Rockhampton’s regional capital status and representative reach, there has
traditionally been several Commonwealth Departments or Agencies that have had a
presence in Rockhampton. These include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Department of Employment
Department of Education and Training
Department of Defence
Department of Human Services
Department of Social Services
CSIRO
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Aboriginal Hostels Limited
Australia Post
Australian Electoral Commission
Australian Taxation Office
Bureau of Meteorology
Fair Work Ombudsman
Family Court Australia
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
Regional Development Australia

Commonwealth centralisation in recent years has led to significant teams from within these
agencies being withdrawn from this region. However, we urge the Committee to not only
reconsider the re-establishment of such agencies but to take advantage of Rockhampton’s
strategic location and industry reach to address regional inequality while also improving the
function and performance of these entities.
5.2 Opportunity for Agriculture, Agribusiness and Primary Production Benefits
Rockhampton has a particularly strong agricultural and primary industry history and links.
For over 160 years Rockhampton has serviced the greater Central and Western Queensland
area with its huge and vitally important primary production activities including beef
production, broadacre farming and horticulture. As the Beef Capital of Australia,
Rockhampton has two of the largest beef processing plants in Australia and hosts one of
the world’s great beef events: Beef Australia every three years. Beef Australia 2015 was
attended by a record 90,000 people including 1,100 registered international guests from
over 40 countries and contributed $74 million to the local economy. At the time of
publication, Beef Australia 2018 (May 6 to 12 2018) is about to commence.

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

More importantly, the event underpins the economic importance of the beef industry on
the national and world stage and how intrinsically linked Rockhampton is to the industry.
As well as beef producers, processing plants, service providers and industry leads,
Rockhampton has also traditionally been the location for industry research activities. For
instance the CSIRO’s Belmont Tropical Cattle Research Centre and associated Rendel
Laboratories were located in Rockhampton and contributed greatly to the beef industries
efficiencies and competitiveness on the world stage.
CQUniversity, Australia’s largest regional university has its main campus and administrative
centre located in Rockhampton. CQUniversity has extensive research elements including
those that are investigating how modern technologies and applications can assist in taking
the beef and other agribusiness industries into the future. The Lower Fitzroy River Water
Infrastructure Development national priority project with its associated Fitzroy Agricultural
Corridor are exciting developments that will greatly increase agribusiness opportunities,
production and export potential in this Region.
By relocating Commonwealth Departments or Agencies with an agricultural, agribusiness
or primary production focus to Rockhampton, those agencies would have immediate
access to industry leads and experts, CQUniversity, state and local government authorities
with industry synergies and signature events on the world stage such as Beef Australia.
There is also the opportunity for the Commonwealth to be in first-hand engagement with
emerging challenges, issues, developments and opportunities. The Commonwealth and its
agencies can more directly lead research and implement industry-enabling policy through
being imbedded (both by locality and direct engagement) in the primary production
industry. While some may regard agriculture as an “old” industry, everything points to it as
the crucial industry of tomorrow to meet demand for food that meets quantity and quality
and nutrition needs, is sustainable, ethically produced and environmentally sound. The
Commonwealth has a unique opportunity to directly engage with and lead this industry
development in Rockhampton for both the national and international interests.
Agricultural government agencies or entities identified as being a good fit in Rockhampton
include the re-establishment of a CSIRO division (e.g. Livestock Industries Division,
Animal Food and Health Sciences).

LIVEABILITY IN THE ROCKHAMPTON REGION
Gateway to the Southern Great Barrier Reef just 30 minutes away, Rockhampton offers
the perfect balance between a cosmopolitan and regional lifestyle. The city is lined with
heritage landmarks that give it heart, a thriving arts scene that give it soul and a culture
that supports diversity. Combined with down to earth hospitality and family values that
can only come from being regional, the bustling Queensland city of Rockhampton is on
the move.
Not many cities can offer affordable living with river and mountain views. The laid back
lifestyle boasts top class sporting facilities, some of Australia’s most prestigious
education centres, gourmet restaurants and signature10events. With major
developments about to reinvent city centre living, now is the time to move your team!

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

5.3 Scope for Relocation of Broad Range of Commonwealth entities to Rockhampton
As well as the agriculture industry, as previously outlined Rockhampton has a long standing
history as a regional capital and a centre of government administration at all levels
including Commonwealth. Its strategic location lends itself to establishing or reestablishing a wide range of Commonwealth Departments, Agencies or divisions thereof.
Other major industries in the region include mining, health care and social assistance,
education, public administration, manufacturing, construction, retail and others.
Importantly, as a regional capital Rockhampton services many other Central Queensland
centres, particularly in terms of government representation. As well, the intended
enhancements to the Shoalwater Bay Training Area, the pre-eminent status of
Rockhampton Airport as a defence airport (5th highest number of military movements in
Australia) and the potential to further develop the region as a defence precinct all build a
case for locating defence elements in Rockhampton.
An important consideration for Commonwealth entities is representation of and reach to
Indigenous Australians. Rockhampton has an 8% Indigenous population base and the
broader region has significant Indigenous representation, including the nearby Woorabinda
community.
In considering the broader region’s industry and demographic reach and demographic
representation (including Indigenous Australians) we consider there would be advantages
in relocating divisions or teams from agencies such as the following to Rockhampton:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (Indigenous Affairs Group)
Department of Human Services
CSIRO (Mining and Manufacturing, Renewables and Energy)
Department of Employment (e.g. Employment Mobilisation and other branches)
Office of Northern Australia (representative presence)
Department of Defence

As well, we strongly urge the reconsideration of the closing or minimisation of the
previously listed Commonwealth entities with a view to re-establishing a presence befitting
Rockhampton’s strategic reach. Such actions are key in order to ensure policy settings to
address regional inequality genuinely result in more equitable growth outcomes in the
short term, while paving the way for sustained improvements into the future.

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

C. POLICY SETTINGS: PRIVATE DECENTRALISATION
Additional policy settings and actions available to the Commonwealth pertain to efforts to
drive corporate decentralisation to help address inequality between regions. Rockhampton
Regional Council has multiple points to offer in regards to actions of the Commonwealth
that would encourage greater corporate decentralisation and what can be learned from
corporate decentralisation approaches.

1. INNOVATION IS WELCOME HERE
Council is implementing its “Advance Rockhampton Economic Action Plan 2016-2020” and
“Smart Way Forward Strategy” initiatives to roll out the red carpet for corporate
decentralisation in the Region. Innovation and new economy opportunities are available in
regions such as the Rockhampton Region, which can reduce inequality. For example:


The Rockhampton Airport was chosen by the Australian Defence Force for its first
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle flight in domestic airspace.



Aurizon chose the region to first trial drone technology in the Central Queensland
Coal Network.



We are a site selected for electric vehicle ‘fuel stations’, open to drone delivery, and
seeking to encourage 3D printing products.

It gives the private sector confidence and an incentive to develop a local presence when the
Federal Government chooses regional locations, such as the Rockhampton Region, to
develop or trial innovations. The use of regional facilities and infrastructure to develop and
trial new innovations is highly recommended.

2. POPULATION GROWTH IS KEY
Population growth is key to reducing regional inequality by de-risking industrial and other
investments in regional Australia. Be it a location choice decision where local labour
market (or the ability to attract labour) is a consideration, or where institutional lending
policies evaluate the upside and downside risks of proposals, a growing population is vital.
The Federal Government can encourage corporate decentralisation by using its population
and jobs forecasts as promotional materials to encourage corporate Australia to be aware
of its ‘good news’ projections and avoid dominant messaging emphasising inequality.

3. GIVING ACCELERATORS AND INCUBATORS ‘LEGITIMACY’
The Federal Government’s ongoing recognition and partnership approach with business
accelerators and incubators, such as the Smart Hub in Rockhampton, is vital to address
inequality and improve corporate decentralisation in Australia.

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

D. POLICY SETTINGS: TAX TREATMENTS
Additional policy settings and actions available to the Commonwealth pertain to regional
taxation treatments of the Australian Tax Office. Significant inequality exists between
regions in regards to the ‘tax zone offset’ and ‘fringe benefit tax zone’ treatments across
Australia.
1. Fringe Benefit Tax Zone
Fringe Benefit Tax Zone treatments include a number of fringe benefits tax (FBT)
concessions that can be used by an employer who provides benefits to an employee
residing in a remote area, among other advantages. A remote area is “a location that is not
in – or adjacent to – an eligible urban area”. An eligible urban area is currently classed an
urban centre which in the 1981 Census had a population of a size. A map of the ATO’s
original classifications is available online with the National Library of Australia. It excluded
major centres such as Darwin, Cairns, Mackay, and Townsville that are now eligible for
these benefits. In contrast, the Rockhampton Region remains classified as ‘non-remote’
and ineligible on the ATO website https://www.ato.gov.au/general/fringe-benefits-tax(fbt)/in-detail/exemptions-and-concessions/fbt---remote-areas/ and in the detailed
Australian Zones List file published by the Australian Tax Office.
2. Australian Zone List A & B
Separate to the FBT housing exemption for remote areas is another tax benefit for residing
in either Zone A or B. This is applicable to an individual’s personal tax. As per the Fringe
Benefits Tax Zone, the variance between regions across Australia is significant in regards to
the Australian Zone List. Tax zones A and B generally start from Mackay and go north
covering Cairns and Darwin. The Tax Offset Amounts are:

This classification of the regions of capital cities and some of the largest cities (by
population) in Australia as “remote” when smaller cities and regions are “urban” is a
significant inequality.

13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 53

CONTACT
Rockhampton Regional Council
Phone: 1300 22 55 77
Email: enquiries@rrc.qld.gov.au

14

