Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 54

Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia
The Maranoa Regional Council area covers 58,834 square kilometres and is located in rural
south-west Queensland, approximately 480 kilometres west of Brisbane. There are 2,525 local
businesses with 68% of the workforce in fulltime employment. Median house price is $225,000
and median age is 36. Roma is the administrative centre of the Maranoa region and home to
Australia’s largest cattle selling centre.
In the year ending June 2016, the Maranoa Regional Council area had a GRP of $1,226 million
which was 0.39% of the total Queensland GRP. This was achieved with a population of
approximately 12,800 residents and 1,250 non-resident workers. The fulltime equivalent (FTE)
population of 14,000 was .29% of the Queensland population. The GRP generated per capita is
about $87,000 for the Maranoa and $65,000 as the Queensland average. Clearly, the Maranoa
region is of significant value to the nation. As a primary production area, raw Maranoa products
are the first step in a value-adding chain for other Australian communities and are major export
contributors.
Foundations of regional inequality
Foundations for regional inequality derive from our small and dispersed populations and large
distances. These lead to generally reduced opportunities for education, health, sport, recreation,
retail and specialised services.
Telecommunications
Although high quality telecommunications could substantially improve the opportunities, the
current coverage, reliability and quality of telecommunications is very patchy, compounded by
the business models affecting supply from the Skymuster satellites and the high costs to deliver
on-ground telecommunications services to scattered communities and properties.
Local businesses cannot effectively link electronically to local, regional and national customers
and suppliers while competing in an increasingly internet-based national and global economy.
For youth and older persons to remain within their home communities, engagement with distant
friends and relatives through the “connectedness” of the internet is essential. While urban
coastal communities can download a high definition movie for entertainment, many rural people
in the Maranoa have trouble accessing simple websites.
The growth capacity of the Maranoa tourism industry is hampered by blackspots and areas of
poor quality communications. Tourist expectations and length of stay (for example, grey
nomads) are facilitated or impeded according to telecommunications availability and quality.
The local ability to use telecommunications (for example as alternatives to multi-language signs,
to recreate 3D views of long-gone towns on visitor ipads or to broadcast warnings) affect
tourism potential. Even some of the basic things like booking online and local research while
travelling can be restricted.
Telecommunications infrastructure provision and access costs are heavily influenced by
government policy. Where there are “economies of scale” impediments, the policy settings have
to be adjusted for regional inequalities to be diminished. As a minimum, telco-businesses
providing supply through the Skymuster satellites should be required to buy minimum size
“pipelines” from the satellites to guarantee service levels for the plans they offer and the size of
their customer base. It appears that the dominant current telco-business model is over-promise
and under-supply.

Maranoa Regional Council

Page 1 of 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 54

Roads
Economies of scale and distance also affect road quality. Although major improvements
continue to be made to the state-controlled roads and the funding through programs which
target roads of regional significance is greatly appreciated, the challenges of road maintenance
and road renewal weigh heavily on local government budgets, to a greater degree than many
coastal urban local governments. Our area is almost as big as Tasmania but with only 13,000
people.
Of particular immediate concern are the “like for like” policies applied to the federal and state
funding provided after natural disasters, especially floods. If significant infrastructure has been
damaged, this is the time to upgrade the infrastructure to a more robust standard to withstand
subsequent natural disasters and future costs. In the aftermath of natural disasters, when local
governments are already facing additional non-recoverable expenses, opportunities for
infrastructure improvement are lost because a reluctance to take on further debt. Policy
settings should be changed so that flood-proofing key infrastructure such as bridges is
managed outside the “like for like” regime.
In a different set of policy settings, there need to be national and state formulae adjustments to
deal with equality across all areas for road access. The foundations for equality would rest on
the level of use each road receives using nationally agreed benchmarks.
In one possibility for policy settings, the lifecycle costs of the road infrastructure could form the
basis of a funding system that links levels of use to the national road standards. Across
national, state and local government tax systems, including the user pays components of tolls
and fuel charges, there could be a common level of allocation according to the road type, with
the road component of local government rates being fixed equally across all rate payers
nationally. Further, all road income sources and allocations should made transparent and easily
searchable for greater accountability.
Public transport
Unlike most coastal urban centres, public transport is very limited. There is no public transport
between most of our towns and nothing within our towns. Again, the small scattered population
and large distances make traditional user pays models unviable. For young people, older
persons and people who cannot afford or cannot drive vehicles, the limited public transport
substantially reduces their opportunities, especially combined with patchy telecommunications.
Although policy changes have, in some cases, led to some Uber-type transport and the
definition of unregulated taxi areas, these options fail to develop because of the economics of
the distances involved. Public transport models in large urban areas are generally subsidised.
We can see the possibilities for flexible, low cost public transport along the on-demand Uberstyle if subsidies were available. This is targeted at the areas outside of the existing regulated
taxi area in Roma but could work in partnership with the Roma taxi system. For example, we
can see the option for smaller public transport vehicles being provided and operated by drivers
on a cost-shared basis.
Council has made a submission to the Senate inquiry dealing with regional air travel and we do
not propose to recover the matters raised in that submission.

Maranoa Regional Council

Page 2 of 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 54

Education
Education opportunities are affected by telecommunications quality, population size and
distribution and distance. The Maranoa Regional Council made a submission to the IRRRRE
inquiry.
We do not propose to recover those matters in this submission except to emphasise potential
policy changes to allow education and training pathways that are suited to regional
communities. In our situation, where Roma is the hub with all larger surrounding towns within
one hour of Roma, we see particular value in an education and training hub (with high quality
telecommunications) in Roma. The hub is to facilitate remote higher education and training
delivery by internet but also the be the centroid of alternative education and training pathways
(for all ages, especially those who are presently disengaged from education, training and
employment). We see this as a business-linked hub.
Mental health and support services
Mental health specialist services are very limited compared to coastal urban areas, especially
out of business hours. This is a particular issue with suicides and especially youth suicide in
rural areas. Some significant improvements could be made with better telecommunications and
local service coordination.
In regional rural areas like the Maranoa, it often means local governments have to invest more
in providing social services for health, aged care, child care and crisis response as a necessity
than urban coastal areas.
Managing industry constraints
Tree clearing:
There is a huge sense of inequality in relation to clearing of regrowth. This is a policy that
penalises those who have done the most for sustainability by allowing trees to regrow in areas
during periods when they were not needed. Using regrowth cycles to husband resources is
subject to penalties. Those people who cleared ground and kept it cleared are rewarded.
Regrowth and its management should be left to those who allowed the regrowth.
If it was an intention of a property manager (or even former owner) to allow regrowth to become
permanent forest, then this should be a land titles matter (by covenant or agreement), not a
vegetation management law.
Rural communities are paying the costs of regrowth policies that urban communities do not
need to confront as a personal economic cost.
Cypress pine:
Co-incident with the regrowth clearing issue, landholders should be encouraged to manage
cypress pine as regrowth and a harvestable resource. The policy settings at state and national
levels need to be adjusted to foster this activity.
The policies need urgent review that allow timber allocations to be sold to overseas buyers
while local sawmills and timber value-adding are starved of logs. Overseas sales of raw timber
resources should not be permitted from an area if local timber mills cannot acquire sufficient
supply to keep operating.

Maranoa Regional Council

Page 3 of 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 54

Game meat harvesting (especially kangaroos):
Urban people in Australia and overseas, who neither understand and who are not affected by
kangaroo harvesting, are relying on poor information and mis-information to influence kangaroo
meat sales and, to a degree, policy. This tyranny requires stronger federal and state responses,
including active community education about the industry and its benefits.
This also flows through to live sheep and cattle exports.
Pest management:
Rural local governments and landholders simply cannot afford to undertake all the pest
management (weeds and feral animals) required across roads, reserves, stock routes and
private lands. Urban communities do not face the same scale of pest management. There has
been a long term trend of devolution of responsibilities without commensurate resourcing.
The work done by all spheres of government, research institutions and business in pest
management and in all areas of biosecurity is acknowledged. The support for exclusion fencing
is very welcome. However, across the nation, the investment is simply not large enough for
extent of the existing challenges and arising threats. A greater tax allocation is needed.
Tourism
We are working with our communities and tourism partners to create sustainable local jobs
where we see tourism having the capacity to provide:
• Jobs for all ages and abilities, especially youth.
• For a range of businesses at different scales (town-based, on-farm, regional, interregional)
Our tourism strategy integrates all aspects of tourism, including natural attractions, sport,
recreation, arts, culture, industrial and agricultural tourism, services providers and technology.
We have specific stories allocated to specific communities. To foster tourism, we need policy
and financial settings that:
• Assist local communities in gathering, collating, preserving and presenting the local
social history that is the foundations of tourism
• Recognise key tourism attractors are often not independently viable but vital to the local
tourism economy. The direct and indirect multipliers make the key tourist attractions add
to net GRP and GDP. Where the key attractions anchor national and international
tourism, ongoing financial support for maintenance and operations should be part of
standard tax sharing.
• Strengthen local use of electronic media in presenting local attractions as well as
marketing (including multi-language story telling)
• Provide support for more tourism traineeships
Community sustainability through local planning
As part of our strategy to improve the capacity of local communities to plan for their futures and
to preserve local knowledge, we have invested in local planning hub technology. This
technology has the scope to help local communities retain and use local knowledge about farm
and pest management and coping with hazards. Crucially, it supports business development,
event and tourism planning, applications for grants and subsidies and cross-community idea
sharing. It is an evolving part of the toolkit needed by regional communities to build on existing
regional knowledge and strengths and to help drive innovation for local sustainability. We can
see how support for this technology should be part of government policy setting to overcome
regional disadvantage.
Maranoa Regional Council

Page 4 of 5

