Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Ray Smith
General Manager
Bland Shire Council
PO Box 21
WEST WYALONG NSW 2671

Jeff Stien
Senior Economic Development & Tourism Advisor
Bland Shire Council
PO Box 21
WEST WYALONG NSW 2671

7 May 2018
Mr Mark Fitt
Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committee on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Dear Mr Fitt
Thank you for the opportunity for Bland Shire Council to provide a brief submission to the
inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Bland Shire Council extends and invitation to the Senate Economics References Committee to visit
West Wyalong and to hold one of its public hearings in West Wyalong to see firsthand the West
Wyalong Airport and the agricultural, mining and exploration activities that are occurring in the
Bland Shire.
Introduction and Background to the Bland Shire
The Bland Shire was proclaimed on 6 March 1906. The Bland Shire, West Wyalong is centrally
located in regional New South Wales at the junction of the Newell and Mid Western Highway and
Goldfields Way.

The Bland Shire and West Wyalong central location
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The Bland Shire and West Wyalong central location

The Bland Shire
The Bland Shire has a population of 5,995 as at the 2016 census, and covers an area of 8,558 square
kilometres. The Bland Shire Council has one of the largest New South Wales Local Government
road networks of 3,248 kilometres which is made up of 879 kilometres of sealed roads, 2,369
kilometres of unsealed roads. Towns and villages in the Bland Shire include West Wyalong,
Wyalong, Barmedman, Mirrool, Naradhan, Tallimba, Kikiora, Ungarie and Weethalle.
The Bland Shire is surrounded by the Shires of Lachlan, Forbes, Weddin, Hilltops, Temora,
Coolamon, Narrandera and Carrathool.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Some of the major employers in the Bland Shire include:
• Bland Shire Council
• Evolution Cowal Gold Mine
• Pace Farms
• GrainFlow and GrainCorp
• Royal Freemasons Benevolent Institution
• NSW Department of Education
• John Holland
Occupation sectors:
• Sheep, Beef Cattle and Grain Farming 24.5%
• Metal Ore Mining 8.2%
• School Education 5.6%
• Local Government Administration 4.6%
• Road Freight Transport 2.5%
Mining and Exploration
The Bland Shire’s history is deeply engrained in gold and tin production and mineral exploration
which continues through to today.
The Bland Shire is located in the Lachlan Orogen. The Lachlan Orogen is a broad orogenic belt
that records Cambrian to the Carboniferous convergence between the Australian craton and the
proto-Pacific Ocean. It is not a collisional orogenic belt. The Macquarie Arc hosts world class
porphyry Cu-Au deposits in the Cadia valley and Northparkes districts. Smaller deposits occur at
Cargo and Copper Hill. Structurally controlled Au-Cu occurs at Cowal.

Gold was discovered in the Bland Shire in 1893 and by the end of 1894 there were 300 mining
claims registered. Gold mining continued until the 1920’s and from 1893 to 1920 some 445,700
ounces of gold was extracted from the West Wyalong gold fields. In 2004 the Canadian Barrick
Gold Corporation https://www.barrick.com/ started to build the Barrick Cowl Gold mine, with
production commencing in 2006 and in 2014 produced 268,000 ounces of gold.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

In 2015 the Barrick Gold Corporation sold the Barrick Cowal Gold mine to Evolution Mining
https://evolutionmining.com.au/ and the Evolution Cowal gold operation
https://evolutionmining.com.au/cowal/ is forecast to produce between 215,000oz and 240,000oz in
FY16. The following photo is of Evolution Cowal Gold Operations in the Bland Shire at West
Wyalong:

Mining and exploration companies that are currently undertaking activities in the Bland Shire
include:
•
•
•
•
•

Evolution Mining - http://evolutionmining.com.au/
Argent Minerals - http://www.argentminerals.com.au/
Thomson Resources - https://www.thomsonresources.com.au/
Sandfire Resources - http://www.sandfire.com.au/
St Barbara Limited - http://www.stbarbara.com.au/

The exploration companies also add to the Bland Shire economy and have expressed a desire for
RPT services to be available in West Wyalong. The Australian Bureau of Statistics, Mineral and
Petroleum Exploration release for the December 2016 quarter shows that total mineral exploration
expenditure increased by 6.1% to $403million. One of the above mentioned exploration companies
have spent almost $10 million since July 2013, with the lions share spent within the Bland Shire.
Both the State and Federal Governments should increase their efforts to encourage more exploration
in regional Australia using the latest technologies.
Agriculture
Agriculture is the Bland Shire’s largest industry sector and is at the heart of the Australian identity.
Australia’s history and economy was ‘built on the sheep’s back’. Today agriculture continues to
play a pivotal role in building the wealth of Australia; this is why the sector is one of the five pillars
of the Australian economy and why the Government has made agriculture a priority.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Agriculture is a significant contributor to the Australian economy. The value of farm production
was $51 billion in 2013–14 (ABARES 2015a). Agriculture contributed around two per cent of
Australia’s gross domestic product (GDP) and 15 per cent of total Australian merchandise exports
(ABARES 2014). Agriculture underpins Australia’s largest manufacturing industry—food,
beverage and tobacco processing—which added $25 billion to the economy in 2013–14 (25 per cent
of manufacturing GDP) (ABS 2015a). As the mining construction boom moderates it will be
important to foster growth in other export sectors, including agriculture.
Agriculture has played an important role in Australia’s history. In the first half of the 20th century it
accounted for around a quarter of the nation’s output and between 70–80 per cent of Australia’s
exports (Productivity Commission 2005). In recent decades, agriculture’s share of Australia’s
national income and exports has declined, consistent with that of many other developed countries.
This is in part due to the strength of the services and mining sectors.
Population growth, increasing prosperity in our region and changing consumer diets and
preferences are creating consumer demand for food and fibre. Worldwide, demand for food is
projected to rise by around 75 per cent in the first half of this century, with three quarters of this
growth in Asia (ABARES 2013a). Australian agricultural production will need to expand
significantly to take advantage of these opportunities. This is likely to require opening up new areas
of agricultural production, including in northern Australia, with the possibility of doubling
production by 2050.
A vibrant, innovative and competitive agriculture sector will create jobs, encourage investment and
help build stronger rural and regional communities, and, in turn, a stronger Australia. Australia
cannot afford not to have vibrant rural and remote townships and a vibrant, healthy and profitable
agricultural sector.
The following schematic has been extracted from the Federal Governments Agricultural White
Paper http://agwhitepaper.agriculture.gov.au/ and mentions that Agriculture is at the heart of the
Australian identity. Our history and economy was ‘built on the sheep’s back’.
Today agriculture continues to play a pivotal role in building the wealth of Australia; this is why the
sector is one of the five pillars of the Australian economy and why the Federal Government has
made agriculture a priority:

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The 2016 Australian Infrastructure Plan http://infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/policypublications/publications/Australian-Infrastructure-Plan.aspx mentions that Australia’s regions
contribute substantially to the nation’s growth and prosperity. Regional Australia produces many of
our key exports – such as minerals, energy, agriculture and tourism. It is also home to around a
quarter of our population.
The booming economies of south-east Asia and China will boost demand for our resources,
services, produce and tourism. Efficient and reliable regional infrastructure will help us take
advantage of this opportunity for growth.
The Bland Shire’s history is deeply engrained in agriculture production which continues through to
today. Agriculture is the major economic driver in the Murray-Murrumbidgee and Central West
and Orana regions.
The following table provides the 2011 Gross Value of Agricultural Production (GVAP) from the
Murray-Murrumbidgee (MM) http://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-your-area/RegionalPlans/Riverina-Murray/Resources, and Central West and Orana (CW&O) regions
http://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-your-area/Regional-Plans/Central-West-andOrana/Resources, with the Bland Shire being the most productive with a GVAP of $328 million:

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Area
2011
GVAP
LGA
sq KM Census Millions
Region
Bland
8,560
5,865
328 Murray-Murrumbidgee
1,640
24,364
281
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Griffith
18,933
2,587
276
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Carrathool
14,965
6,476
260
Central West & Orana
Lachlan
5,260
6,585
216
Central West & Orana
Narromine
5,749
9,815
194
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Greater Hume
2,066
8,066
187
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Berrigan
6,024 12,821
178
Central West & Orana
Cabonne
5,955 14,592
173
Central West & Orana
Parkes
4,718
9,170
172
Central West & Orana
Forbes
4,116
5,902
169
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Narrandera
7,521
3,692
164
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Wakool
2,329 11,000
161
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Corowa
9,916
4,030
152
Central West & Orana
Coonamble
4,826 59,458
150
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Wagga Wagga
10,754
2,758
149
Central West & Orana
Warren
2,802
5,776
147
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Temora
3,409
3,665
134
Central West & Orana
Weddin
2,431
4,099
126
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Coolamon
2,896
2,998
120
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Lockhart
3,356
1,159
115
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Urana
12,371
9,588
113
Central West & Orana
Warrumbungle
3,373
1,496
112
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Jerilderie
4,344
6,957
104
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Murray
8,738
1,540
102
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Conargo
3,507
2,261
99
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Murrumbidgee
2,030
5,878
95
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Junee
14,601
2,900
94
Central West & Orana
Bogan
1,167 11,037
91
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Leeton
2,809 12,147
86
Central West & Orana
Cowra
4,832
4,368
86
Central West & Orana
Gilgandra
11,326
2,956
84
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Hay
4,567 10,934
80
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Tumut
4,110
8,493
72
Central West & Orana
Wellington
8,753 22,318
63
Central West & Orana
Mid Western
1,524
7,334
61
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Cootamundra
3,816 38,519
56
Central West & Orana
Bathurst
4,393
3,358
55
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Tumbarumba
3,426 38,805
54
Central West & Orana
Dubbo
2,457
3,662
42
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Gundagai
143
7,120
39
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Deniliquin
1,525
6,985
38
Central West & Orana
Blayney
3,627
5,040
31
Central West & Orana
Oberon
4,512 20,160
19
Central West & Orana
Lithgow
284 38,057
16
Central West & Orana
Orange
306 47,810
5
Murray-Murrumbidgee
Albury City
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). ABS undertake an Agricultural Census of farm businesses
every five years and an Agricultural Survey in the interim years reporting estimates for Statistical Local
Areas (SLA’s), the smallest spatial unit of the Australian Standard Geographic Classification (ASGC 2006).
The 2011 Census data and 2012 and 2013 surveys were collated by Statistical Area Level 2 (SA2). SLA and
SA2 boundaries do not line up exactly but for most parts of the region they are close enough to generate
meaningful time series data sets.

Bland Shire Council recognises the significant importance of the agricultural sector and the Bland
Shire is one of New South Wales largest cereal-growing areas producing wheat, barley, oats,
triticale, cereal rye, chickpeas, field peas, lupins, canola and sorghum.
As can be seen in the following table, the 2016 ABS Census data shows that in the Bland Shire,
Agriculture, forestry and fishing industry by occupation is the largest employment sector employing
727 or 28.6% of the Bland Shire’s workforce followed by mining at 213 and 8.4%.
ABS 2016 Census Industry By Occupation Total
%
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
727 28.6
Mining
213 8.4
Retail trade
202 7.9
Education and training
191 7.5
Health care and social assistance
187 7.4
Accommodation and food services
146 5.7
Construction
131 5.2
Transport, postal and warehousing
114 4.5
Public administration and safety
147 5.5
Other services
105 4.1
Manufacturing
77 3.0
Professional, scientific and technical services
68 2.7
Administrative and support services
50 2.0
Wholesale trade
46 1.8
Rental, hiring and real estate services
22 0.9
Financial and insurance services
17 0.7
Electricity, gas, water and waste services
8 0.3
Information media and telecommunications
8 0.3
Arts and recreation services
4 0.2
Inadequately described/Not stated
105 4.1
Total
2,696
A vibrant and progressive rural community is vital to support the agricultural sector where they can
have access to RPT services, educational facilities, purchase supplies, access services including
banking, mechanical, engineering, medical and allied health, agricultural machinery companies, car
dealers, tyre and exhaust services etc.
There is a rationale for investing in slower growing regions based on social reasons or to unlock
potential opportunities. Our slower growing regions should have access to vital services such as
schools, hospitals, transport and other community facilities. Such regions will still be great places to
live, and may score more highly than larger cities on measures of well-being and social connection.
Over the longer term, as regional hubs expand and technology continues to connect our regions,
these areas could become even more attractive places to live and work.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Bland Shire Council is working with Plains Water on agricultural projects that have the potential to
generate 155 FTEs.
Eucalyptus Oil Production
Eucalyptus oil production started in 1907 and the West Wyalong area has become one of the major
world exporters of Eucalyptus oil in Australia http://www.grdavis.com.au/.
Recent investments in the Bland Shire
Recent investments in the Bland Shire include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Evolution Mining $694 million
GrainCorp $14 million
Sandfire Resources $10 million
Royal Freemasons Benevolent Institution (RFBI) Masonic Village $9 million refurbishment
Sandfire Resources $8.5 million
GrainFlow $4 million
Hanlon Enterprises $1.1 million

NAB Customer Spending Report
In a recent NAB Customer Spending report http://business.nab.com.au/nab-customer-spendingbehaviours-q4-2016-22578/, the Bland Shire was the 7th fastest growing Local Government Area
(LGA) in regional Australia:

The Visitor Economy
The visitor economy sector is also extremely important to the Bland Shire as it is centrally located
in regional New South Wales at the junction of the Newell and Mid Western Highways and
Goldfields Way. Bland Shire Council would like to see more international visitors disperse into the
regional NSW. Statistics show that approximately 88% of visitors to regional areas drive and
approximately 7% fly. More funding needs to be allocated to the NSW regional road network and
also to increase the number of visitors and tourists that fly to regional and remote communities.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Inequality
Acoss’s https://www.acoss.org.au/ Inequality in Australia 2015 report found excessive inequality in
any society is harmful. It is harmful to the ability of people to participate in social and economic
opportunities, and it undermines social cohesion. Excessive inequality is bad for the economy.
When resources are concentrated in fewer hands, there is a reduction in economic activity. Fewer
people are starting up businesses, buying houses, and purchasing goods and services. More people
become dependent on government intervention. Excessive inequality is ultimately unhealthy for
democracy. Money and power matter in terms of who in society gets heard, who can participate,
and whose interests are adequately protected. In Australia, which lacks legal protections for basic
human rights, the risks of excessive inequality are magnified.
The risks of rising inequality are becoming increasingly recognised around the globe. In a report
published in May 2015, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
found that rising income inequality reduced economic growth by an average of around 5% across
OECD countries over the two decades to 2010. The main reason for this is that, by widening the
rungs in the income ladder, it closes off opportunities for people at the bottom of the distribution.
By holding people back from realising their potential, especially through employment, it stunts their
contribution to the economy.
The widening gap between middle and top income-earners in most wealthy countries over the past
20- 30 years is also cause for concern. The top 10%, and even much smaller fractions of this group,
are pulling away from the living standards of the majority, and increasingly, people at the top end
are leading very different lives to the rest of us.
In a country that prides itself on its egalitarian traditions, the reality of income and wealth inequality
in Australia comes as a shock to many. The purpose of the Acoss report was to use the latest
available information to explain in simple, objective terms what is happening with income and
wealth inequality, how big the gaps are, whether they are widening, and who is affected.
The Report has found that there is a big gap in incomes and wealth between different groups in
society. A person in the top 20% income group receives around five times as much income as a
person in the bottom 20%. A person in the top 20% wealth group has a staggering 70 times as much
wealth as a person in the bottom 20%.
The Report also finds that these gaps are widening. Over the last 20 years the share of income
going to those at the top has risen, while the share flowing to those in the middle and at the bottom
has declined. The same is true for wealth, with the bottom and middle having lost ground to those
at the top. The wealth of the top 20% wealth group increased by 28% over the period from 2004 to
2012, while by comparison the wealth of the bottom increased by just 3%.
Income Inequality
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#income found that income inequality in
OECD countries is at its highest level for the past half century. The average income of the richest
10% of the population is about nine times that of the poorest 10% across the OECD, up from seven
times 25 years ago. Only in Turkey, Chile, and Mexico has inequality fallen, but in the latter two
countries the incomes of the richest are still more than 25 times those of the poorest. The economic
crisis has added urgency to the need to address inequality. Uncertainty and fears of social decline
and exclusion have reached the middle classes in many societies. Arresting the trend of rising
inequality has become a priority for policy makers in many countries.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Inequality and Gender
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#gender found that breaking down barriers to
gender equality in education, employment and entrepreneurship would create new sources of
economic growth and help make better use of everyone’s skills.
Greater educational attainment has accounted for about half of the economic growth in OECD
countries in the past 50 years, in large part thanks to an increase in girls reaching higher levels of
education and greater gender equality in the number of years spent in school. Companies with a
higher proportion of women in top management do better than others.
But on average, in OECD countries, women earn 16% less than men, and female top-earners are
paid 21% less than their male counterparts. Women occupy less than a fifth of parliamentary seats
around the world and their access to top positions in companies is even worse.
The impact of pay inequality is dramatic over a woman’s lifetime. Having worked less in formal
employment, but having carried out much more unpaid work at home, many women will retire on
lower pensions and see out their final years in poverty. Living an average of nearly 6 years longer
than men, women over 65 are today more than one and a half times more likely to live in poverty
than men in the same age bracket.
Inequality in Health
The OEDC http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#health found that the progress in health
status and life expectancy in OECD countries and in emerging economies has been remarkable, but
not even. Large inequalities exist not only across countries, but also between population groups
within each country. Inequalities in health status are due to many factors, including differences in
living and working conditions and in behavioural factors, but also in access to and quality of health
care. Despite significant progress in most countries, access to quality health care varies across the
socio-demographic groups, including by sex, age, geographic area and for financial and nonfinancial reasons.
Greater emphasis on public health and disease prevention, along with improved access to health
services, can improve the health status and life expectancy of disadvantaged groups. Most OECD
countries have endorsed, as major policy objectives, the reduction of inequalities in health status
and the principle of equal access to health care based on need. The OECD regularly monitors to
what extent policies to reduce health inequality achieve their objectives and assesses the potential
benefits and costs of various policy interventions.
Inequality in Education
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#education found that inequalities which
surface in the job-market are often entrenched during education, which puts those at the bottom at a
serious disadvantage. Poorer students struggle to compete with their wealthier classmates and go
on to lower levels of educational attainment, smaller salaries, and most strikingly, shorter lives.
Data from 15 OECD countries shows that, at age 30, people with the highest levels of education can
expect to live, on average, six years longer than their poorly educated peers.
Investing in education and training will pay long-term dividends for the economy, for individual
well-being, and for the overall prosperity of our societies. Reaching excellence through equity is
possible. For that, we need to develop more ambitious education and skills policies. Our evidencebased PISA and PIAAC initiatives highlight large inequalities in education and skills. They also
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

demonstrate that there are major potential benefits to equip disadvantaged groups, such as low
social-background students and low-skilled workers, to acquire better skills and compete for betterpaying jobs.
Inequality in Tax
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#tax found that while increasing inequality
presents key challenges for all policymakers, tax policy has a particularly important role in
addressing inequality and boosting economic growth. As pre-tax income inequality increases, the
role of tax policy will only grow more important. Maintaining the overall progressivity of the tax
code is a key priority in this regard. Moreover, countries are increasingly coming together to cooperate on international tax issues, to reduce the ability of high-wealth individuals and companies to
shift assets and income offshore to avoid taxation. A wide variety of other policies are also on the
agenda for many OECD countries.
Examples of policies that countries could consider implementing to tackle inequality include:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

Reducing social security contributions and payroll taxes on low-income workers, to encourage
them to stay in the labour force and boost their skills, and to make them more attractive for
companies to hire.
Abolishing or scaling back a wide range of tax deductions, credits and exemptions which
benefit high income recipients disproportionately;
Taxing as ordinary income all remuneration, including fringe benefits, carried interest
arrangements, and stock options;
Considering shifting the tax mix towards a greater reliance on recurrent taxes on immovable
property;
Reviewing the efficacy and effectiveness of wealth and inheritance taxes;
Examining ways to tax capital income at the personal level at slightly progressive rates, and
align top capital and labour income tax rates;
Increasing transparency and international co-operation on tax rules to minimise “treaty
shopping” (when high-income individuals and companies structure their finances to take
account of favourable tax provisions in different countries) and tax optimisation;
Broadening the tax base of the income tax to reduce avoidance opportunities and thereby the
elasticity of taxable income;
Developing policies to improve transparency and tax compliance, including continued support
of the international efforts, led by the OECD, to ensure the Automatic Exchange of Tax
Information between tax authorities.

Inequality and Regions
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#regions found that Inequality is closely
linked to where people live and work. The economic crisis has widened inequalities across regions
within countries. The spatial concentration of income inequality has been increasing everywhere.
In advanced economies, income inequality is highest within large cities, with large disparities in
income from one area of a city to another. In the developing world, the “urban advantage” remains
strong: many more children in rural areas die before the age of 5 due to lack of access to basic
health care and poorly educated mothers. Addressing regional disparities is a key element of a
strategy to reduce inequality and increase wellbeing.
Evidence shows that the factors that most influence peoples’ well-being are local issues, such as
employment, access to health services, pollution and security. So, the policy responses must also be
locally targeted. Policies that take better account of regional problems and needs may have a
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

greater impact on improving well-being for the country as a whole by tackling the sources of
inequality more directly. But to effectively target policies, governments need the tools to fully
understand local conditions and the expectations of their citizens. The publication "How's Life in
Your Region", which will be launched in September 2014, will help policy makers to:
•
•

enhancing the relevance of sub-national measures and analysis for addressing policy issues;
improving our understanding of the links between policy actions implemented at the local and
regional level and outcomes expressed in terms of people’s well-being.

Inequality and Well-Being
The OECD http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#wellbeing found that inequality is a key
driver of individual and country’s well-being and this is why inequality is one of the distinctive
features of the OECD well-being measurement framework adopted in the OECD Better Life
Initiative.
The report How’s Life? 2017, for instance, includes an in-depth review of well-being inequalities
and how to measure them, and shows that gaps in people’s achievements and opportunities extend
right across the 11 dimensions of well-being (income and wealth; jobs and earnings; housing; health
status; work-life balance; education and skills; social connections; civic engagement and
governance; environmental quality; personal security; and subjective well-being). It exposes
divisions according to age, gender, education, and wealth, and reveals pockets of inequality in all
OECD countries. It also brings to light the many well-being disadvantages that migrants face in
adapting to life abroad. Additionally, the report examines governance as seen from the citizen’s
perspective, revealing divides between public institutions and the people they serve. The Better Life
Index, which is another pillar of the OECD Better Life Initiative, also documents inequalities in
selected well-being dimensions. It notably shows gender inequalities in well-being and well-being
disparities due to socio-economic gaps.
Inequality and Innovation
The OEDC http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm#innovation found that innovation and
entrepreneurship are major potential sources of growth with strong spill over benefits across the
economy. But in the past, innovation policies have generally been assessed in terms of their impact
on aggregate income growth. However, these impacts are unlikely to be “neutral” as they might
affect individuals and groups differently (“social inclusiveness”). All individuals and businesses
are not on an equal footing regarding innovation capacities and access to the corresponding benefits
(“industrial inclusiveness”). Moreover, policies aimed at promoting innovation affect the
geographic dimensions of industrial and social inequalities and underpin inequalities between urban
and rural (“territorial inclusiveness”).
As a result, it is essential to consider the social, industrial and territorial implications of innovation
policies as well. This is especially important if the changes inherent in the innovation process
exacerbate income disparities by creating opportunities primarily for high-skilled workers. Inclusive
innovation policies – such as implementing well-designed policies to support young firms, simplify
registration procedures for start-ups, and improve access to finance and other essential business
services – can help mitigate these costs.
What the OECD produced in their findings could be applied to Australia, NSW and the Bland Shire.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Terms of Reference
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs in the following areas:
a) fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
The fiscal policies of the Federal and State Governments have a major impact on the inequality in
regional Australia and the Bland Shire. Some of the issues are:
Rate Pegging
The imposition of a 1.5% rate peg announced by the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal
(IPART) for 2017/18 will push NSW Councils further behind the financial eight-ball, and
effectively preventing councils from becoming financially sustainable and addressing Councils
infrastructure renewal and backlog. Rate pegging affects the ability of the Bland Shire to allocate
funds to invest in and maintain and improve the social, cultural and community infrastructure in the
Band Shire including the West Wyalong Airport and the Bland Shire road network.
IPART came to the 1.5% figure despite an increase of 2.3% in employee benefits and on-costs, and
an increase of 2.7% in non-residential building construction costs. IPART said that these price rises
were partly offset by decreases in gas and fuel prices. This is not the case as energy prices have
increased and are projected to increase further.
IPART has failed to recognise the ongoing squeeze on councils that comes from the combination of
rate-pegging, cost-shifting, deteriorating infrastructure and the Federal Government’s decision to
pause the indexation of the Financial Assistance Grants (FAGs) for the next three years.
The latest figures show cost shifting by the NSW Government and the Australian Government in
the financial year 2013/14 totalled around $670 million - almost 7% of local government's total
income before capital amounts.
The reality is that rates have not kept pace with the cost of services and infrastructure that Local
Government is expected to deliver and the rate peg has forced many Councils to seek special rate
variations to provide infrastructure and services.
NSW councils are being squeezed from all sides, by rate-capping and also by cost-shifting by the
State and Federal Governments, which cost councils more than $820 million per annum.
Grants
The amount of information required to apply for and acquit State and Federal Government Grants is
extremely demanding, time consuming and costly if you are required to prepare a cost benefit
analysis or ratio. The requirement of meeting a Cost Benefit Ratio of greater than one for projects
in regional NSW also makes it difficult for the majority of local regional councils to have any hope
of applying for and receiving grants. The grants are usually way over subscribed and appear to be
targeted towards the larger regional centres. The lead time given to apply for some grants is also
very short and State and in some cases the Federal Government Grants are released at the same time
and local councils may not have the resources available to apply for the grants.
There also appears to be little consultation between the Government Departments and Councils in
relation to what grants are needed in regional NSW and the resources available to apply for and
acquit the grants.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Bland Shire Council would like to see grants to include the refurbishment and improvement of
existing assets and facilities including airports, picnic or playground areas, local parks, barbeques,
meeting facilities and regional and town entry features instead of building new assets and facilities.
Another issue with the State and Federal Government grants is that they require co-contributions
and most regional councils are not able to provide co-contributions which excludes them from
applying for the grant.
The NSW State Government is also making the grants available for NSW State Government
Departments available to apply for them and a recent example of this was the NSW Government
recently announced $27million had been allocated out of the NSW government’s Regional Growth
Environment and Tourism Fund (RGETF) https://www.nsw.gov.au/improving-nsw/regionalnsw/regional-growth-environment-and-tourism-fund/ to develop walking tracks in Kosciuszko NP.
The applicants for this project were the NSW Government Office of Environment & Heritage /
NSW National Parks.
Cost Shifting
Cost shifting describes a situation where the responsibility for, or merely the costs of, providing a
certain service, concession, asset or regulatory function are 'shifted' from a higher level of
government on to a lower level of government without providing corresponding funding or the
conferral of corresponding and adequate revenue raising capacity.
Cost shifting by the NSW Government and the Australian Government on to Local Government in
NSW in the financial year 2013/14 is estimated to amount to $670 million or 6.96% of Local
Government’s total income before capital amounts – about $88 million higher than the result for
2011/12 of $582 million.
The Local Government NSW survey results https://www.lgnsw.org.au/policy/cost-shifting-survey
confirm that cost shifting continues to place a significant burden on councils' financial situation.
Despite the recognition of cost shifting and its adverse impacts on NSW local government, cost
shifting remains at a high level (around 6 per cent of councils' total income before capital amounts).
NSW councils are being squeezed from all sides, by rate-capping and also by cost-shifting by the
State and Federal Governments, which cost councils more than $820 million per annum.
Financial Assistance Grants (FAGs)
Financial Assistance Grants (FAGs) are a vital payment from the Commonwealth to local councils
that makes up part of the revenue base of all councils. These untied payments are essential and
allow local councils to provide a reasonable level of service to your local residents. Councils invest
these funds in areas such as maintaining a range of infrastructure including maintaining and
replacing local roads, bridges, parks, swimming pools, libraries and community facilities as well as
services to the young, the elderly and community groups.
By way of example, Local Government is responsible for almost 85% of the total road network of
900,083 kilometres across Australia. The States and Commonwealth raise approximately $18.4
billion in road related taxes each year, and the Commonwealth provides approximately $1.2 billion
annually in road funding to local councils. It is estimated that local roads are underfunded by
around 3 billion dollars each year.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The decision in the 2014 Federal Budget to freeze indexation of FAGs had a major impact on local
councils including the Bland Shire.
The Federal Government announced in the 2017/18 Federal Budget that they would end the
indexation freeze on FAGs which had been frozen over the three years from 2014/15 to 2016/17.
The three-year freeze has had a harsh impact on NSW councils – since the freeze was imposed by
the Federal Government in 2014, NSW councils have missed out on up to $300 million in million.
Local Government is one of the biggest sectors in our national economy, spending over $30 billion
per annum nationally - including $11 billion in NSW where councils employ more than 50,000
people, mainly in rural and regional NSW.
In 1996, Financial Assistance Grants were equal to about 1% of the total Commonwealth tax take.
Despite an average 3.47% annual growth rate in Australia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) from
1960 until 2017, Financial Assistance Grants have declined and now amount to approximately
0.57% of Commonwealth tax revenue. This is a drop of about 43% in relative terms, which can’t
help but have a very significant impact on local government’s ability to provide and maintain
community infrastructure.
Local government has long called upon the Commonwealth to provide FAGS at 1.0% of taxation
revenue to allow local governments to address the ever increasing backlog of infrastructure
maintenance and renewal required which is estimated to be increasing by over $2 billion each year.
If Local Government had been provided with just 1.0% of Commonwealth Tax Revenue Local
Government would receive an additional $1.146B annually, going a long way to meeting the
backlog.
NSW councils are being squeezed from all sides, by rate-capping and also by cost-shifting by the
State and Federal Governments, which cost councils more than $820 million per annum.
Different Standards
There are different standards between the levels of Governments and we will relate this to the
recently released report by the NSW State Audit Office
https://www.audit.nsw.gov.au/publications/latest-reports/internal-controls-and-governance-2017 on
the Internal Controls and Governance 2017. The report found that NSW government agencies
overspent on consultants and contractors by $250 million. The report found government agencies
used consultants or contractors on 82 per cent of major capital projects, with almost a third
exceeding their original budget. The report also found 13 per cent of capital projects were not
supported by a business case. The controls that the NSW Government impose on local
governments would not tolerate this negligent behaviour.
b) improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
From a local government and Bland Shire Councils point of view there appears to be no
coordination of federal, state and local government policies except for the coordination of federal
and state government polices to shift costs onto local government.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

c) regional development policies;
The regional policies appear to be developed by bureaucrats who have lost touch with regional
Australia and NSW or do not have clue of the regional issues or what is in regional Australia or
NSW. One example of this was recently a statement was made by a senior bureaucrat from the
NSW Department of Premier of Cabinet that the Bland Shire or West Wyalong was not mining
affected, yet gold was discovered in West Wyalong in 1893 and was mined until the 1920’s and
Barrick Gold https://www.barrick.com/ established the Barrick Cowal Mine in 2004 which was
recently sold to Evolution Mining https://evolutionmining.com.au/ and is currently licensed to
produce gold until 2032.
NSW Governments regional development policies do not assist companies or staff moving from
Sydney to regional NSW but will assist companies who are moving from interstate to NSW. The
NSW Government has an assistance policy for businesses that employ more than ten new full time
employees which excludes most small business in regional NSW. One or two new full time
positions in the smaller regional centres is definitely worth more than ten new full time positions in
the larger regional centres.
The NSW Government is rolling out Functional Economic Regions (FER) and Regional Economic
Development Strategies (REDS) based around communities and labours of interest, yet without any
consultation. The NSW Government has included the Bland Shire and West Wyalong in the FER
with Temora, Weddin, Hilltops and Gundagai. The Bland Shire has hardly any communities and
labours of interest with these Local Government Areas (LGAs).
In December 2016 the NSW Government established the Centre for Economic and Regional
Development (CERD)
https://www.dpc.nsw.gov.au/programs_and_services/centre_for_economic_and_regional_developm
ent which is based out of Orange NSW. The CERD was formed to lead economic and regional
development policy and analytics. According to the CERD’s website, the centre will provide
insightful real time analysis for industry, government, peak bodies and more broadly anyone with
an interest in economic development issues. The CERD is guided by a Chief Economist Dr
Andrew Stoeckel and advised by an Expert Panel from across Australia and internationally
consisting of Dr Janine Dixon, Dr Leo Dobes, Dr Nicholas Gruen, Professor Lee Pugalis, Professor
John Rose, Professor Bob Stimson and Professor Glyn Wittwer. The CERD is run by staff with a
range of experience in public policy and economics and it was the Instead of establishing the
CERD the NSW Government would have been better off consulting directly the LGAs in regional
NSW instead of wasting the exorbitant amount of money in setting up and running the CERD.
Another example of deficient regional development policies is the State and Federal policies
relating to the Newell Highway which is mention below. The Newell Highway is NSW’s and
Australia’s third largest freight corridor and premier inland touring route and yet it has been flooded
and or closed between West Wyalong and Forbes in 1950, 1952, 1956, 1962, 1973, 1974, 1975,
1983, 1990 for twelve weeks, and 2012 and in 2016 for six weeks. The conservative cost for this
six weeks closure in 2016 from West Wyalong and Forbes was $153 million dollars. Imagine if the
Federal or the Hume Highway, or the M5 freeways were closed for six weeks? The NSW
Government Department of Roads and Maritime Services (RMS) have been applying band aid fixes
to the Newell Highway and not fixing it properly. The RMS’s funding programs also need to be
overhauled and a significant funding increase to the Newell Highway must be made by both the
State and Federal Governments.
The recently released State Government Destination NSWs Destination Riverina Murray (DRM)
Destination Management Plan (DMP) https://riverinamurray.com.au/ is focused on the larger
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

centres of Wagga Wagga, Albury and Griffith and this is adding to the inequality for the smaller
regional centres in the Riverina Murray region. The DRM DMP is also focused on food and wine
and aquatic themes and this is also increasing the inequality for the smaller regional centres.
The Federal Government Smart Cities and Suburbs Program
The Federal Governments Smart Cities and Suburbs Program
https://cities.infrastructure.gov.au/smart-cities-program that supports the delivery of innovative
smart city projects that improve the liveability, productivity and sustainability of cities and towns
across Australia is a great program but it is targeted towards the larger cities and larger regional
centres. As mentioned earlier an issue with the State and Federal Government grants is that they
require co-contributions and most regional councils are not able to provide co-contributions which
excludes them from applying for the grant.
Federal Government Regional Growth Fund
The Federal Governments Regional Growth Fund
http://regional.gov.au/regional/programs/regional-growth-fund.aspx which will provide grants of
$10 million or more for major transformational projects which support long-term economic growth
and create jobs in regions undergoing structural adjustment is a great program. The requirement of
having a minimum $10 million co-contribution for the grant will exclude most regional councils
from applying.
d) infrastructure;
Regional Telecommunications
Many rural and regional areas including the Bland Shire do not have access to the mobile phone and
internet services that are taken for granted in urban Australia including Sydney. Reliable mobile
phone and internet coverage is critical for the future growth of Australia’s agriculture sector and
regional NSW. Today’s trading environment requires real-time access to, and sharing of,
information. Enhancing mobile coverage in regional and remote areas also has clear social,
economic and safety benefits.
Access to reliable and affordable mobile phone and internet coverage in remote and regional areas
is essential to NSW and Australia’s future growth, and the growth of the agriculture sector.
Improved services have the potential to revolutionise agriculture in Australia. For good reason
communication coverage was the issue most often raised by the agriculture sector during the
development of this White Paper. This is an area of critical importance to the Government.
The use of information technology has evolved from basic GPS to precision farming. The next
frontier is ‘big data’—or data-enabled agriculture, which will provide information to assist better
decision making through real time delivery of relevant and specific knowledge. The potential for
productivity gains through increasing yields, reducing costs and reducing agricultural risks is
progressing through initiatives currently underway. These include Sense-T in Tasmania and the
GrainGrowers ProductionWise programme. Farm machinery companies have developed
applications that not only warn farmers of the need for maintenance, but also use data collected to
facilitate real time benchmarking, further driving productivity gains. Today’s farmers need access to
mobile phone coverage and broadband internet to run their businesses efficiently. Those farmers
that have access to these services are able to run their businesses from the stockyard, from their
tractor or while they are harvesting. But communication services are often not available, or are
unreliable or expensive.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Expanding mobile coverage to areas where it is currently inadequate or non-existent has clear
economic, social and safety benefits. A study commissioned by the Australian Communications
and Media Authority found that in the seven years to 2013, mobile broadband contributed 2.1 per
cent of productivity gains in the agriculture sector (CIE 2014). Due to comparatively higher costs
and lower levels of revenue, mobile network operators are reluctant to invest in extending coverage
into regional areas on a commercial basis. To help address this, the Australian Government
established the $100 million Mobile Black Spot Programme.
Inadequate mobile phone coverage is a significant issue especially in regional and remote
communities. This includes portions of major highways and transport routes, popular seasonal
tourist locations, locations at high risk of natural disasters, and key mining and agricultural areas.
Mobile phone blackspots, extensive grey and shadow spots and mobile phone coverage failures
adversely affect community resilience and increase the vulnerability of communities when the need
for mobile communications is heightened.
Inadequate mobile phone coverage disadvantages individual communities and the wider national
economy. Lives can quite literally depend on access to mobile phone coverage.
It is accepted that the Australian population is increasingly reliant on mobile services as a
convenient utility for safety and emergency purposes. However, mobile phone blackspots, extensive
grey and shadow spots and mobile phone coverage failures exist in regional and remote areas of
Australia meaning mobile telephones services cannot be relied upon or do not exist in some areas.
The majority of the land mass and roads in the Bland Shire have numerous black spots, extensive
grey and shadow spots and mobile phone coverage failures. This not only proves difficult and
frustrating for the businesses, residents, motorists and visitors, but also represents a specific risk
during disaster and emergency conditions. In the case of farmers, often working alone on their
properties, this is also an unacceptable health and safety risk.
The mobile phone coverage along the major transport routes, in small communities and in locations
prone to experiencing motor vehicle accidents or natural disasters must be improved in the Bland
Shire. The Newell and Mid Western Highways and Goldfields Way that traverse the Bland Shire
all have black spots, extensive grey and shadow spots and mobile phone coverage failures.
The Bland Shire also receives a large flow-through of population along our vast road network and
highways as we are based centrally from most capital cities and are a large distance from other
towns. More and more visitors and travellers are also accessing information from their smartphones
and or mobile devices and when they stop they often make use of the opportunity to phone friends
and family, make accommodation and tour bookings and use their tablets and computers that
consequently puts added pressure on the telecommunication infrastructure. The lack of consistent
reliable mobile phone coverage reception has obvious safety consequences for not only the visitors
to the Bland Shire but also the farmers and residents.
As mentioned previously the Bland Shire is one of the largest winter cereal cropping districts in
NSW and subsequently has a large number of contractors visiting the area to grow and harvest these
crops who need consistent reliable mobile phone coverage.
As a result of the above the Bland Shire experiences substantial peaks in visitation which
significantly impacts the capacity of the mobile networks, resulting in backhaul issues.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The following photos were taken in the Bland Shire and provides additional evidence of the poor
mobile phone coverage in regional NSW and the Bland Shire:

The following schematics have been extracted from the Federal Governments Australian
Government National Map https://nationalmap.gov.au/ showing the community reported black
spots (the blue dots in the schematics). It is clearly evident by these schematics that the greater
Sydney has far better mobile coverage than regional NSW and the Bland Shire:
The following schematic shows the community reported blackspots in Sydney
https://nationalmap.gov.au/#share=s-js0DygVIwg8nWhNIZj1gRoqP0Xc:

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The following schematic shows the community report mobile blackspots in Canberra
https://nationalmap.gov.au/#share=s-vgdmXPVjYdvDe9c6VM8Pyg1uxaf:

The following schematics shows the community reported mobile blackspots in NSW and compared
to the greater Sydney and Canberra regions, demonstrates that there will be a need for a significant
upgrade in communication infrastructure in regional NSW to eliminate the mobile phone blackspots
and to provide the same coverage as what is provided in the greater Sydney region
https://nationalmap.gov.au/#share=s-acMTYITjvWZjpwnhqSZXjJ3rRYn:

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 21

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The following schematic shows the community reported mobile blackspots in the Bland Shire and
compared to the greater Sydney region demonstrates that there will be a need for a significant
upgrade in communication infrastructure in the Bland Shire to eliminate the mobile phone
blackspots and to provide the same coverage as what is provided in the greater Sydney region
https://nationalmap.gov.au/#share=s-9ttzWqILmrIcyfZ4qR43iFH3APc

Bland Shire Council Road Network
As mentioned in the introduction, the Bland Shire Council has one of the largest NSW Local
Government road networks of 3,248 kilometres which is made up of 879 kilometres of sealed roads,
2,369 kilometres of unsealed roads.
Also mentioned previously, the Bland Shire is one of NSW largest cereal growing areas in NSW.
The large quantities of grain produced from the farms in the Bland Shire is transported to the grain
receival facilities or direct to port or between the grain receival facilities by road. The tonnages of
grain and the number of trucks involved in this operation places a huge toll on the sealed and
unsealed Bland Shire road network.
The LGA’s that surround the Bland Shire also produce large quantities of grain and due to the large
and efficient grain receival facilities in the Bland Shire, the preference by these grain producing
operations is to deliver the grain to the facilities in the Bland Shire which adds to the tonnages and
truck movements into and out of the Bland Shire and on the Bland Shire sealed and unsealed road
network.
In 2012 and 2016 NSW and the Bland Shire were subjected to extreme wet weather events that
created multi-million dollar repair bills and a long wait for works to be done that caused extensive
damage to the Bland Shire and NSW road network. The extreme wet weather events disrupted the
National Freight Task by the flooding of the Newell Highway for six weeks and the towns and
villages of the Bland Shire.
There has got to be a way we can streamline and improve the recovery and assistance to Councils
following extreme weather events to reduce the amount of disruption for the towns and villages of
the Bland Shire. There has to be a better and timelier process as with roads, to get NSW
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 22

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Government funding, the bureaucratic red tape means that we can't start on the road works or get
the funding until the RMS has inspected the damaged roads.
To improve the efficiency and productivity of these grain receival and storage facilities, investment
will be required in the local (Bland Shire), regional and state road network to accommodate Higher
Mass Limits (HML) and High Productivity Vehicles (HPV). The following Bland Shire local roads
have been identified as the best routes for HML’s and HPV’s but are currently substandard and
require investigation and investment to accommodate the HML’s and HPV’s:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Ungarie to Naradhan
Rankins Springs to Lake Cargelligo
Dundas
Crown Camp Road
Kolkilbertoo
West Wyalong to Lake Cargelligo
West Wyalong to Condobolin
Blow Clear
Clear Ridge
Wamboyne
Quandialla
Mary Gilmore Way
Tallimba
Boreamble
Girral
Bodells
Hatelys
Ridleys

The Bland Shire roads identified on the previous page are highlighted in yellow in the following
schematic:

As there is desire by all levels of Government to improve the efficiency and productivity of the
movement of freight and the implementation of higher mass and productive vehicles the
Commonwealth and NSW Governments should undertake a review and provide funding to inspect
and to bring these roads and maintain these roads so that they can handle the higher mass and
productive vehicles.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 23

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Newell Highway
The Newell Highway (http://www.newellhighway.org.au/route39/;
http://www.rms.nsw.gov.au/projects/western-nsw/newell-highway/index.html) is the premier
inland touring route in NSW and the third largest freight corridor in NSW as is evidenced by the
following NSW Government Bureau of Freight Statistics 2011 and 2031 and Transport NSW 2016
– 2026 and 2016 - 2056 schematics.
The Newell Highway has been flooded and or closed between West Wyalong and Forbes in 1950,
1952, 1956, 1962, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1983, 1990 for twelve weeks, and 2012 and in 2016 for six
weeks. The conservative cost for this six weeks closure in 2016 from West Wyalong and Forbes
was $153 million dollars. We have attached a copy of the report titled, ‘The Newell Highway
closure in 2016 from flooding: The direct and indirect effects’.
Bland Shire Council would like to see additional funding allocated for the Newell Highway for:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Road pavement improvements
Heavy vehicle town by-pass routes
Additional overtaking lanes
Additional modern rest stops that allow for the separation of vehicles
Installation of the wide centre line treatment and tactile edges
More appropriate and modern signage including town entry and exit signs
Flood proofing the Newell Highway
More and regular cleaning of rubbish along the Newell Highway
NSW Government funding for the Newell Highway Promotions Committee
Improvements and funding for the main streets in the towns on the Newell Highway
Keeping road side vegetation down to protect the road integrity and improve safety by reducing
the collisions between animals and motor vehicles
Road Safety Programs
Eliminating the mobile black spots on the Newell Highway and installation of free WiFi in the
towns on the Newell Highway

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 24

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 25

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

The Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and Olympic Way
Other important roads to be improved include the Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and
Olympic Way. Bland Shire Council would also like to see the following works carried out on the
Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and Olympic Way:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Road pavement improvements
Heavy vehicle town by-pass routes
Additional overtaking lanes
Additional modern rest stops that allow for the separation of vehicles including Yalgogrin
Installation of the wide centre line treatment and tactile edges
More appropriate and modern signage including town entry and exit signs
Flood proofing the Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and Olympic Way
More and regular cleaning of rubbish on the Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and
Olympic Way road side corridors
Keeping road side vegetation down to protect the road integrity and improve safety by reducing
the collisions between animals and motor vehicles
Road Safety Programs
Eliminating the mobile black spots on the Mid Western Highway, Goldfields Way and Olympic
Way

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 26

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Regional Air Services
Bland Shire Council currently has no RPT services but maintains a fully‐functional all‐weather
airport which has a basic Passenger Terminal available for use, and the Bland Shire Council would
welcome the reintroduction of RPT services to the West Wyalong airport. In the past West
Wyalong was serviced by RPT services, which ceased after the construction of the Barrick Cowal
Gold Mine was completed.
While there is currently no RPT services at the West Wyalong Airport, one of Bland Shire
Council’s plans is to investigate and target RPT services and to promote economic development and
education / visitor / tourism / aviation activities at the West Wyalong airport. Over the last four
years the West Wyalong airport has hosted the Bathurst Soaring club for a number of their annual
gliding camps.

West Wyalong Airport

Gliders lined up at the West Wyalong Airport with four time world champion
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 27

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Charter, medical and other aircraft at the West Wyalong airport during 2017:

Charter Flights at the West Wyalong Airport in 2018 including the Deputy PM

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 28

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Besides the economic impacts, airports and RPT services also play an important social role in
connecting individuals, families and communities with the rest of the state, country and indeed the
world.
It is without doubt that by West Wyalong not having a regular RPT service has a major negative
economic impact on the Bland Shire, and the value of having a regular and reliable RPT service
cannot be overstated. The Bland Shire is 491km or 5hr 41min from Sydney by road and is not on a
direct passenger train service. West Wyalong is serviced by a nine hour XPT train from Sydney to
Cootamundra, then a Country Link bus from Cootamundra to West Wyalong. The XPT departs
Sydney at 7:32am and arrives in Cootamundra at 12:46pm, with the Country Link bus arriving in
West Wyalong at 4:40pm.
Government, businesses and residents of the Bland Shire have to travel to the following centres to
access RPT services:
Griffith:
Wagga Wagga:
Parkes:
Leeton / Narrandera:

154km - 1hr 52min
155km - 1 hr 58min
138km - 1hr 43min
143km - 1hr 42min

The additional time and costs to existing businesses in connecting to these RPT services is quite
substantial and adds to the bottom line of conducting a business in the Bland Shire. Research has
also shown that whilst accessing these RPT services, there is a lot of revenue leakage from the
Bland Shire as a result of these businesses taking the advantage of accessing services and supplies
at these locations.
The Bland Shire is one of New South Wales largest cereal-growing areas producing wheat, barley,
oats, triticale, cereal rye, chickpeas, field peas, lupins, canola and sorghum and the Deloitte Access
Economics report
http://www.tourism.australia.com/documents/Statistics/Statistics_Aviation_CONNECTINGAUS_
May2012.pdf mentions, that the use of air services has become exceedingly important in light of the
greater economic integration between national and global markets. Airports provide easier access
to suppliers, staff and customers, particularly over longer distances, increasing business efficiency
and thereby contributing to stronger productivity performance and economic growth.
Should a regular RPT service be reintroduced to West Wyalong, the service will assist in offsetting
the current maintenance and upkeep costs that the Bland Shire Council is outlaying on the West
Wyalong airport. The reintroduction will also provide confidence for investors, businesses and
services to invest in the Bland Shire and in aviation opportunities that may arise.
Past studies have shown that a location with a regular and reliable RPT service will grow faster than
an location who does not have a regular and reliable RPT service, and a study conducted by Deloitte
Access Economics
www.tourism.australia.com/documents/Statistics/Statistics_Aviation_CONNECTINGAUS_May20
12.pdf showed that, in 2011, Australia’s airports generated a total economic contribution of around
$17.3 billion, equivalent to around 1.2% of Gross Domestic Product. National employment at
airports was estimated at approximately 115,200 full‐time equivalent (FTE) workers. Consisting of
nearly 56,500 air transport jobs (ABS 2012), the broader aviation industry supports activity at
airports and air service dependent sectors.
The Deloitte Access Economics report also mentions, that the use of air services has become
exceedingly important in light of the greater economic integration between national and global
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 29

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

markets. Airports provide easier access to suppliers, staff and customers, particularly over longer
distances, increasing business efficiency and thereby contributing to stronger productivity
performance and economic growth.
Past studies have also showed that the likelihood of sustaining or attracting new enterprises,
services or business without a regular and reliable RPT service is dramatically reduced. By not
having a regular RPT service the Bland Shire is severely impacted as air travel as the preferred
method of travel used by visitors / tourists from the major capital cities, particularly those travelling
for short stays and events.
It is noted that there is a significant disparity between airfares inter-capital and airfares into regional
NSW. This generates disincentives for air travel to regional NSW. Landing fees are a small part of
the problem though is regularly rolled out as of concern to air passenger service providers.
Bland Shire Council would also encourage that the NSW Government work collaboratively with the
Commonwealth Government to reintroduce the En-Route Rebate scheme as a matter of urgency.
Bland Shire Council would also encourage that the NSW Government and the Federal Government
work collaboratively to reduce the cost of regulatory compliance for regional airports.
Bland Shire Council would also like to mention that the costs of running regional airports including
compliance costs for safety and security and the like are escalating, Local Government airport costs
are increasing in a rate capped environment.
In the November 2012 Australian Airports Association report http://airports.asn.au/wpcontent/uploads/2012/12/AAA-Regional-Airports-Research-Paper_FA.pdf.pdf.pdf, as many as 50%
of regional airports may be operating at a loss each year, and are heavily dependent upon crosssubsidisation by their local government owners who face multiple and competing demands on their
limited finances. In these circumstances, developing non-aeronautical activity on-airport can be
essential in order to maintain future capacity for aeronautical activity.
The report also mentions that the number of airports serviced by RPT operators has declined
markedly over the years and trends in airline operations threaten to further reduce this number in the
future, risking increased isolation for many Australians in rural and remote communities.
Bland Shire Council feels that the State and Federal Governments and Airline Operators provide
safe, affordable, efficient and effective aviation services as part of their corporate, social and
environmental responsibility. We feel that RPT services to the smaller regional centres e.g. West
Wyalong should be subsidised by the users of the larger more profitable routes.
Modern and efficient air services between country areas and the state capital are essential for the
economic and social wellbeing for government, businesses and residents, and particularly for
country residents who rely on air travel increasingly for access to the wide range of services no
longer available outside Sydney. This includes travel to essential government, education, health
and medical purposes etc.
Governments can positively influence rural and regional airfares through a mix of policy levers:
•
•
•

Providing new and additional funding to subsidise airport infrastructure investment and
maintenance in rural and regional areas;
Ensuring that Government compliance requirements remain reasonable and affordable for Local
Councils, operators and passengers; and
Providing pricing oversight of airline airfares through consumer competition regulation.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 30

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Bland Shire Council would like the NSW Government to work with the Federal Government to
ensure the continued reservation of affordable access (slots) at Sydney Airport (Kingsford Smith
Airport) at peak times for regional services and investigate the slot allocation rules to determine if
there is a more efficient way to coordinate airline movements (take-off and landing) within the
defined hour period.
Ensuring regional slots remain and are increased at Kingsford Smith airport is essential for
government, businesses and communities in regional NSW. The location of Kingsford Smith
Airport and the improved train service between the domestic terminal and the city centre enables
passengers with meetings and appointments to travel to Sydney and back within the one day. This
is critical due to the extra costs with over-nighting in Sydney and remembering that in many
instances people have had to travel to reach the airport in their regional location. In the case of
West Wyalong this is a 154km journey both ways to Wagga Wagga. In recent times to add to the
cost of flying out of Wagga Wagga, Wagga Wagga City Council has imposed car parking fees at
their airport.

Regional Rail Network
Bland Shire Council would like to see increased investment and upgrading of the NSW Rail
Network to increase the Wagon Tonne Axle Load by Limit on the regional rail network including
the Lake Cargelligo and Naradhan rail network to Cootamundra as per the following schematic:

As the freight task is expected to double in the Greater Sydney area and grow by a quarter in
Regional NSW the NSW Government should open the non-operational branch lines such as the
Barmedman to Rankin Springs line to allow more efficient delivery of high volume grain to the
ports, and the West Wyalong to Burcher line not only to allow more efficient delivery of high
volume grain to the ports, but to allow better delivery and removal of road base material from the
Evolution Cowal Gold mine.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 31

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Mining and Exploration Activities in the Bland Shire
As mentioned in the introduction the mining and exploration companies that are currently
undertaking activities in the Bland Shire include:
•
•
•
•
•

Evolution Mining - http://evolutionmining.com.au/
Argent Minerals - http://www.argentminerals.com.au/
Thomson Resources - https://www.thomsonresources.com.au/
Sandfire Resources - http://www.sandfire.com.au/
St Barbara Limited - http://www.stbarbara.com.au/

The exploration companies also add to the Bland Shire economy and the Australian Bureau of
Statistics, Mineral and Petroleum Exploration release for the December 2016 quarter shows that
total mineral exploration expenditure increased by 6.1% to $403million. One of the above
mentioned exploration companies have spent almost $10 million since July 2013, with the lions
share spent within the Bland Shire. Both the State and Federal Governments should increase their
efforts to encourage more exploration in regional Australia using the latest technologies.
We have attached some information that demonstrates that there are considerable mining and
exploration activities being undertaken in the Bland Shire and should the exploration activities
determine the presence of additional mineral resources and that the companies establish mining
operations in the Bland Shire, this will place considerable pressures on transport and community
and social infrastructure in the Bland Shire including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Transport
Gas
Water
Electricity
Roads
Staff
Housing
Community & social infrastructure – Cultural & Community Centre
Industrial Land
Residential Land
Telecommunications
Policing
Education
Health
Emergency Services

The following 2013 NSW Government Office of Environment & Heritage figures show that the
Bland Shire LGA is by far the largest energy user in the Riverina and should additional mining
operations commence in the Bland Shire there will be need for a significant upgrade in
infrastructure required for the Bland Shire.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 32

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

County Councils Water and Distribution
Bland Shire Council would also like to comment on the cost of infrastructure head works charges
that are being imposed by the County Councils to new residential and industrial developments. The
exorbitant charges are restricting residential and industrial investment.
Social, Cultural and Community Infrastructure
Investment in cultural and community infrastructure is essential for the health, social wellbeing and
economic prosperity of regional communities. Indeed it has been described as the cornerstone of
wellbeing in a community. Social, cultural and community infrastructure plays an important role in
bringing people together, helping to form friendships and social support networks, and in helping
communities to develop life skills and resilience. All these attributes are essential elements in the
creation and maintenance of strong communities.
As mentioned previously, NSW councils are being squeezed from all sides, by rate-capping and
also by cost-shifting by the State and Federal Governments, which cost councils more than $820
million per annum.
Local government has long called upon the Commonwealth to provide FAGS at 1.0% of taxation
revenue to allow local governments to address the ever increasing backlog of infrastructure
maintenance and renewal required which is estimated to be increasing by over $2 billion each year.
The State and Federal Governments must continue to invest in social, culturl and community
infrastructure in the smaller centres regional Australia and NSW.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 33

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

e) education;
With the amount of the current and future agriculture and mining investment that has taken place or
is planned for the Bland Shire, it would be beneficial for the West Wyalong TAFE NSW Campus to
be upgraded and equipped and staffed to offer training for the expected new positions that will be
created.
The public and high schools in the Bland Shire will also need to be upgraded to cater for the
increased demand as a result of the amount of the current and future agriculture and mining
investment that has taken place or is planned for the Bland Shire.
Bland Shire Council sees Charles Sturt University (CSU) and the University of New England
(UNE) playing an important in the building of human capital in regional Australia and NSW and
Bland Shire Council would like to see funding increased for these regional universities for health
and engineering.
f) building human capital;
Bland Shire Council considers that the economic, social, cultural and environmental development of
Australia will be enhanced by further building human capital. Bland Shire Council sees Charles
Sturt University (CSU) and the University of New England (UNE) playing an important in the
building of human capital in regional Australia and NSW. Regional universities provide the most
direct and cost-effective way of further harnessing talent, developing skills and contributing to
knowhow to our regions for the benefit of all Australians. CSU and UNE play a key role in
fostering vibrant, diverse and resilient communities.
Bland Shire Council understands that human and social capital are increasingly key determinants of
economic prosperity in regional Australia and NSW. Human capital includes knowledge, skills,
understanding and the ferment of ideas. Collectively, they serve to open up people's horizons,
create new industries, perform existing tasks better and more competitively, assist in personal and
institutional adaptation to changing situations, and generally help individuals to anticipate change
and fashion their lives accordingly. Education is also personally enriching because it enables
people to live fuller lives and to secure more financially intellectually rewarding jobs in regional
Australia and NSW.
g) enhancing local workforce skills;
The Federal Governments Department of Jobs and Small Business
https://www.jobs.gov.au/national-state-and-territory-skill-shortage-information has identified that
there are skills shortages in regional Australia and the skill shortages apply to the Bland Shire in a
number of occupations.
h) employment arrangements;
Most Australians spend a substantial part of their lives in the workforce. Employment
arrangements have changed dramatically where as a few decades ago, employed people particularly male workers - typically worked in full-time wage and salary jobs with regular working
hours, and could often expect to remain in the same job for a long time. This situation has changed,
with the emergence of different forms of employment and different working arrangements. Over the
last decade, there has been strong growth in casual and part-time employment, and many people
now have flexible working hours, or have a working pattern that differs from the five-day working
week. These changes have coincided with other changes in the labour market such as growth in the
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

service industries, increasing numbers of women in the workforce, sustained periods of relatively
high unemployment, labour market deregulation and changes in technology.
i) decentralisation policies;
The recently released Infrastructure Australia Future Cities (AFC) report
http://infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/policy-publications/publications/future-cities.aspx indicated
that Australia’s largest cities are facing a watershed moment in their growth and development. In
the coming 30 years the size of the Australian population will grow substantially. Between 2017
and 2046, Australia’s population is projected to increase by 11.8 million people. That’s equivalent
to adding a new city, roughly the size of Canberra, each year for the next 30 years.
The AFC report mentions that in the next 30 years, Sydney’s population is projected to increase by
2.4 million people, growing to be a city of 7.4 million. Over the same period, Melbourne is
projected to grow by 2.7 million people, to be a city of 7.3 million. The growth of Brisbane and
Perth, while on a smaller scale, will still bring substantial change to both cities. Between now and
2046, Brisbane is projected to grow by 1.6 million people and Perth by 2.2 million people,
delivering cities of just under 4 million and 4.3 million, respectively.
The capital cities are already congested and affordable houses increasingly out of reach, wage
growth slow and household debt high. Regional Australia and NSW are not congested and to
attract people to regional Australia, NSW and the Bland Shire a concerted effort must be made by
the State and Federal Governments to improve the social and community infrastructure in the large
and small regional centres to make them more attractive to entice people to want to move to them.
Most smaller regional centres do not have public transport services which detract people from
moving to regional Australia and NSW including the Bland Shire.
The NSW Government is currently focusing on the hub and spoke model which will see the further
decline in the smaller regional centre which have been and re the back bone of Australia and NSW.
Both the State and Federal Governments should embed decentralisation policy in government to
increase the impact of government employment and expenditure in regional Australia, NSW and the
Bland Shire.
Relocation of Public Sector Jobs
Relocating government agencies has the dual objectives of bringing government decision-making to
local communities and stimulating growth and long-term job generation in regional NSW. The
NSW Government already contributes significantly to regional employment.
Bland Shire Council believes there are further opportunities to relocate public sector jobs and
government business units to regional NSW and not just to the Western Suburbs of Sydney or to the
coastal or larger regional cities and communities i.e. Wagga Wagga, Bathurst, Griffith, Albury,
Dubbo, Queanbeyan, Orange, Newcastle, Wollongong, Goulburn, Tamworth, Armidale, Gosford,
Coffs Harbour, Tweed Heads, and Port Macquarie etc.
With the relocation of the public sector jobs will see an increase in the need and use of airline
services to regional centres.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 35

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

j) innovation;
We mentioned earlier that many rural and regional areas including the Bland Shire do not have
access to the mobile phone and internet services that are taken for granted in urban Australia
including Sydney. Reliable mobile phone and internet coverage is critical for the adoption of new
technologies and for the future growth of Australia’s agriculture sector and regional NSW. Today’s
trading environment requires real-time access to, and sharing of, information. Enhancing mobile
coverage in regional and remote areas also has clear social, economic and safety benefits.
Access to reliable and affordable mobile phone and internet coverage in remote and regional areas
is essential to NSW and Australia’s future growth, and the growth of the agriculture sector and for
the adoption of new technologies. Improved services have the potential to revolutionise agriculture
in Australia. For good reason communication coverage was the issue most often raised by the
agriculture sector during the development of this White Paper. This is an area of critical importance
to the Government.
The use of information technology has evolved from basic GPS to precision farming. The next
frontier is ‘big data’—or data-enabled agriculture, which will provide information to assist better
decision making through real time delivery of relevant and specific knowledge. The potential for
productivity gains through increasing yields, reducing costs and reducing agricultural risks is
progressing through initiatives currently underway. These include Sense-T in Tasmania and the
GrainGrowers ProductionWise programme. Farm machinery companies have developed
applications that not only warn farmers of the need for maintenance, but also use data collected to
facilitate real time benchmarking, further driving productivity gains. Today’s farmers need access to
mobile phone coverage and broadband internet to run their businesses efficiently. Those farmers
that have access to these services are able to run their businesses from the stockyard, from their
tractor or while they are harvesting. But communication services are often not available, or are
unreliable or expensive.
k) manufacturing; and
Electricity and gas prices for manufacturing businesses and households have increased sharply in
recent years and indications are that prices will continue to increase and this is a major concern to
the businesses and households in regional Australia and NSW.
l) any other related matters.
The inequality of accessing services is a major concern for regional NSW, whether it be health,
community banking, servicing or repairing the motor vehicle or farm machinery, phone and
internet, emergency services and many more. Surely in this day and age residents of regional
Australia, NSW and the Bland Shire should not go without or be forced to travel major distances to
access these services that are taken for granted in the major centres and capital cities.
The lack of ready access to these services is a disadvantage that hits the core of many of the towns
and villages in regional Australia and NSW and this need to be brought to the attention of the State
and Federal Governments and their bureaucrats.
Cost and Supply of Energy
Electricity and gas prices for manufacturing businesses and households have increased sharply in
recent years and indications are that prices will continue to increase and this is a major concern to
the businesses and households in regional Australia and NSW.
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 36

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

In NSW for example, three electricity companies Origin, AGL and Energy Australia control 90 per
cent of the market. These retailers also own the three largest electricity generators in NSW, giving
them a lot of control over how much power is produced and how much it’s sold for.
The 2017 residential electricity price trends report prepared by the Australian Energy Market
Commission (AEMC) https://www.aemc.gov.au/markets-reviews-advice/2017-residentialelectricity-price-trends identified the current changes in the energy supply chain components that
are driving costs and affecting the trends in residential electricity prices and bills for each state and
territory of Australia from 2016/17 to 2019/20 (the reporting period). The four electricity supply
chain components are:
•
•
•
•

network costs: comprised of transmission and distribution costs, which account for around 40 to
55 per cent of the price
wholesale market costs: which account for around 30 to 40 per cent of the price in most
jurisdictions
environmental policy costs: which directly account for around 5 to 15 per cent of the price
residual component: which account for around 5 to 15 per cent of the price in most jurisdictions.

The 2017 report shows that the trends in residential electricity prices are primarily driven by
wholesale electricity purchase costs in all jurisdictions. In the National Electricity Market (NEM),
wholesale cost are expected to increase from 2016-17 to 2017-18 due to the retirements of Northern
(546 MW), Hazelwood (1,600 MW) and Smithfield (171 MW) synchronous power stations and
high gas prices and decrease in 2018-19 and 2019-20 due to new generation (approximately 4,100
MW across the NEM, of which 3,900 MW is renewable) and the return to service of Swanbank E
(385 MW in Queensland). The regulated network component continues to be uncertain in a number
of jurisdictions due to ongoing legal and regulatory processes.
Regional fuel price differences
Bland Shire Council realises that the Fuel prices are generally higher in regional Australia due to:
•
•
•
•
•

•

lower population and demand resulting in fewer outlets, leading to less competition
higher costs for transport and storage of fuel
less demand for convenience sales like drinks, food and newspapers that can enable retailers to
add to overall profits and keep fuel prices lower
the location of outlets–whether or not they are on a highway and likely to get a high number of
customers
regional fuel retailers don’t usually sell their fuel stocks as quickly as city retailers, so when
there is any change in the international benchmark and wholesale prices of fuel it generally
takes longer to impact on country retail prices
while prices in regional areas might fall slowly they also tend to rise more slowly.

The higher prices of fuel increase the cost of living in regional Australia, NSW and the Bland Shire
and affect the discretionary purchasing power of the residents and businesses. Most residents in
regional Australia do not have the luxury of having access to public transport or cheap airfares as
those living in the capital cities and larger regional centres in Australia.
Tourism Australia and Destination New South Wales Sector Development
Tourism Australia and Destination NSW’s sector development or main activities are concentrated
around Aboriginal Tourism, Youth, Food & Wine, Cruise and Regional Conferencing. Bland Shire
Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 37

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Council believes that this sector development is extremely limited and there is more to regional
NSW than these sectors. One sector that is overlooked by Destination NSW is the caravanning and
camping sector which is extremely important to regional NSW.
The visitor economy sector is also extremely important to the Bland Shire as it is centrally located
in regional New South Wales at the junction of the Newell and Mid Western Highways and
Goldfields Way. Bland Shire Council would like to see more international visitors disperse into the
regional NSW. Statistics show that approximately 88% of visitors to regional areas drive and
approximately 7% fly. More funding needs to be allocated to the NSW regional road network.
Native Title and Aboriginal Land Claims
Through the NSW Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983, Crown land not lawfully used or occupied, or
required for an essential public purpose, or for residential land, is returned to Aboriginal people.
Aboriginal land rights aim to redress past injustices when Aboriginal people were dispossessed of
their land by colonisation. This dispossession led to many social, economic and physical problems
for Aboriginal people. The Department of Industry - Lands investigates and assesses Aboriginal
Land Claims across the State.
Native title is the name Australian law gives to the traditional ownership of land and waters that
have always belonged to Aboriginal people according to their traditions, laws and customs. These
rights are different to and separate from the statutory right of Aboriginal Land Councils to make
claims for land under the NSW Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983.
The changes to the Native Title Act and Land Claims are stifling development in regional
communities with delays, costs and red tape.
Inequality in Health in Regional Australia, NSW and the Bland Shire
As mentioned earlier there are large inequalities in health across all of Australia. Inequalities in
health are due to many factors, including differences in living and working conditions and in
behavioural factors, but also in access to and quality of health care.
Examples of this inequality in the Bland Shire is that on occasions there is no doctor on call at the
West Wyalong hospital and patients have to be transferred to the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital
which is a two hour drive from West Wyalong.
As mentioned previously West Wyalong is located on the Newell Highway the third largest freight
corridor in Australia and is the premier inland touring in Australia. West Wyalong has a working
gold mine that operates twenty four hours a day seven days a week and three hundred and sixty five
days a year and it is disappointing in this day and age that there is a shortage of doctors for the West
Wyalong Hospital.
Recently a farmer based just north of Weethalle in the Bland Shire had a heart attack and it took the
farmer five hours to be transferred by ambulance to the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital and as a result
of the time that it took the farmer to get to the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital for surgery he has lost
70% of the function of his heart which will affect him for the rest of this life which one would have
thought that this would be unacceptable today.

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 38

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 57

Bland Shire Council would like to see the lack of allied health services i.e. physiotherapy,
occupational therapy, midwifery (for the younger mine workforce and families) improved in
regional NSW and the Bland Shire.
Once again Bland Shire Council extends and invitation to the Senate Economics References
Committee to visit the Bland Shire and West Wyalong and hold one of its public hearings in West
Wyalong to see firsthand the West Wyalong Airport and the agricultural, mining and exploration
activities that are occurring in the Bland Shire. West Wyalong is central to the following regional
centres of Wagga Wagga, Dubbo, Bathurst, Orange, Parkes, Leeton, Narrandera, Griffith etc.
Should you require additional information then please do not hesitate to contact either Ray Smith on
or
or Jeff Stien on
or
.
Yours sincerely

Ray Smith
General Manager

Jeff Stien
Senior Economic Development & Tourism Advisor

Bland Shire Council Submission to the inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia – Page 39

