Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

Rural and Regional
Inequality in WA
Economic Senate
Submission
30 April 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

Contact:
Kirstie Davis
Policy Manager Community
WALGA
ONE70, LV 1, 170 Railway Parade West Leederville

Website:

www.walga.asn.au

www.walga.asn.au

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

Contents
1.0

Rural and regional inequality in Western Australia ...................................................... 4

2.0

Causes of inequalities ................................................................................................ 4

3.0

Examples and Solutions ............................................................................................. 7

4.0

Recommendations ................................................................................................... 11

5.0

References ............................................................................................................... 12

www.walga.asn.au

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

1.0 Rural and regional inequality in Western Australia
The Senate Economics References Committee has called for submissions regarding regional
inequality in Australia. Specifically the experiences of individuals and localities of unequal
access to opportunities and outcomes, views on the causes of inequality, insight to economic
regional inequality and the wider impacts, examples and solutions to regional causes and
information regarding the policy settings which could help address regional inequality.
The Western Australian Local Government Association (the Association), is the voice for 138
Local Governments in Western Australia (WA). The Association strives to enhance the
capacity of Local Government to deliver services, build positive profiles, provide effective
leadership and ensure fair and equitable representation to the communities they serve.
WA is a vast state occupying one third of Australia and covering over 2.5 million square
kilometres, home to nearly 2.5 million people. The state is divided into nine regions, each with
differing demographics. The diversity of the state and the distribution of the population over a
large geographic expanse creates significant challenges in ensuring equitable service delivery
and distribution.

2.0 Causes of inequalities
The lack of accessible, effective and comprehensive service delivery to rural-remote West
Australians, both compounds the problems and renders a solution more difficult, as cycles of
poverty and disconnectedness become entrenched over time and generations. A submission
to the Senate outlined the income inequality experienced by the people of rural and remote
Australia (NRHA, 2014) which is still substantiated to the present day (ABS, 2017). Reasons
outlined in the 2014 submission included fewer employment opportunities, high costs of goods
and services, poor infrastructure for public transport, communications, housing, poorer
education and educational outcomes, and other unavoidable consequences of living in small
and isolated places. The following submission builds on and provides a more acute focus on
some of the causes of long term inequalities.
Climate Change
Climate change is driving economic inequality and vice versa. Research into this field is still
emerging. However a classic principle underpinning this cause of inequality is the
understanding that many people living in the regions are unable to afford to retrofit homes to
suit changing climates which is resulting in even higher costs (due to the high cost of living
and lower wages), generating higher power usage and therefore more pollution (Cimons,
2017). Climate change is also a greater concern for regional biodiversity hotspots in the South
West through to regional coastal locations and inland environments. This has been
significantly devastating in extreme weather events and long term patterns wiping out
agricultural communities and devastating crops and livelihoods.
Remoteness
It has been well documented that the adequacy of infrastructure and cost of services is
significantly higher in regional spaces across Australia (Callander et. al., 2017). Further to this,
there are unique challenges facing Local Governments and the role they play in the broader
Local Government setting, encompassing the concept of mainstreaming. Often Local
Governments are determined as the provider of last resort and hence Local Governments in
the regions are seen as the service panacea. Greater levels of remoteness, often correlates

www.walga.asn.au

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

with smaller populations which results in ‘market failure’ due to scalability and private sector
service provision, further creating inequalities and inequities for rural and remote communities.
Resource Townships
WA resource towns often exist ‘on a knife-edge, largely depending upon global demand for
their resources, and at the same time, playing a critical role in the development of a nation’
(Martinus, 2015). In WA this is a unique display of geographic, political, social and economic
factors and is specifically showcased in the Goldfields. Acknowledging the structure and
industry base of regional WA is a key driver for employment and economic opportunities
(Transitioning Economies Submission to Productivity Commission in February 2017).
Compliance
The burden of increasing legislative compliance and administration of grant funding to deliver
essential services in increasingly contributing to regional inequity. Other governance
challenges include the need to build capacity of Councillors and staff and to encourage more
effective community engagement.
Service Level Reform
Over the last 20 years, the management of public services has changed through either
reduction or amalgamation, either directly or indirectly affecting services. This may have
occurred through direct and contracted services. More recently the consistent change of
governments in short time frames has left significant gaps in delivery of mental health, access
and inclusion and other human services. For example the delivery of the Partners in Recovery
Program through the current Primary Health Networks and the National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS). In these current examples, resourcing and health and wellbeing outcomes
for individuals, are areas of negative impact.
Aboriginality
As part of State Government reform in 2012, a project was undertaken to improve the delivery
of Local Government services in Aboriginal communities. The project involved costing and
planning for the delivery of services to Aboriginal communities in WA and reflects the intent of
the Bilateral Agreement. However Councils affected by the Bilateral Agreement were unable
to obtain agreement from governments to provide adequate resources to take over
responsibility for municipal services in Indigenous communities. (Mortan, 2012). Local
Governments continue to seek long term generational funding agreements.
Gender
The gendered impact of structural change in regional labour markets is one of the major
causes of economic inequalities across industries and sectors, with long term impacts to the
social capital of community. Understanding the determinants of gender gaps is essential to
promoting a balanced pattern of economic growth. Flexible working arrangements is a key
factor in promoting women’s engagement in the workforce.
Some of the multidimensional and complex indicators of gender bias are embedded in culture
as stemmed from traditional agricultural communities and their associated attitudes, values
and beliefs. Other determinants of gender gaps range from family choices including maternity,
employee policies and interventions, and economic development. Bamberry (2017) suggests
that during a recession, gender inequality in regional workforces’ increases, with women's
participation rates and income falling, increasing the overall gender pay gap. Women's overall
contribution to household income is therefore reduced relative to men's income, which in turn
will represent a higher proportion of household income.

www.walga.asn.au

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

Women’s empowerment and economic development are interrelated. On one side, economic
development improves women’s conditions and reduces inequality between woman and man,
on the other hand, the involvement of women is a key engine for growth (Jain-Chandra, 2015).
Domestic Violence
Social demographics of WA have developed in direct relation to population growth and density
and economic prosperity. Family and domestic violence continues to have a profound and
devastating effect on individuals, families, and communities in regional and remote WA. It is a
complex and persistent social problem that has no easy solution
A comprehensive, committed and shared response across all State and Commonwealth
government departments, community sector organisations and the wider community is
required if the incidence of family and domestic is to be reduced. A new Western Australian
Family and Domestic Violence Prevention Strategy 2022 provides the framework in which a
comprehensive and shared response to family and domestic violence can be achieved.
Significantly it represents an important long-term focus on early intervention, victim safety and
perpetrator accountability.
Homelessness
More than half of the people experiencing homelessness on census night were in regional and
remote areas of WA. Individuals and families experiencing homelessness are extremely
vulnerable, and lack adequate housing and income and the necessary supports to ensure they
stay housed. Homelessness is usually the result of the cumulative impact of a number of
factors, rather than a single cause. Structural factors are economic and societal issues that
affect opportunities and social environments for individuals. Key factors can include the lack
of adequate income, access to affordable housing and health supports and/or the experience
of discrimination. Shifts in the economy, both nationally and locally, can create challenges for
people to earn an adequate income, pay for food and for housing.
Arguably, the highest factor is the lack of affordable housing nationwide as is discrimination,
which can impede access to employment, housing, justice and helpful services. Racial and
sexual minorities are at greater risk of such discrimination. Precarious employment is also a
critical factor in sustaining accommodation.
There is an undeniable connection between domestic violence and experiencing
homelessness. Family violence can force individuals and families to leave home suddenly,
without proper supports in place. This is particularly an issue for young people and women,
especially those with children. Women who experience violence and who live in poverty, are
often forced to choose between abusive relationships and homelessness. Young people who
are victims of sexual, physical or psychological abuse often experience homelessness.
Opportunities to address systems failures include addressing service transitions from child
welfare, discharge planning for people leaving hospitals, corrections and mental health and
addictions facilities, and support for immigrants and refugees.
Digital Transformation
The pace of technological advancement over 20 years have been nothing short of
revolutionary with all services being impacted by new advances to technology, both positively
and negatively. Web based information sharing to mobile computing devices such as smart
phone technology has improved information sharing processes at the detriment of mental
health and social happiness. Technology has shaped the way people live and work and
created a new set of beliefs, fears and aspirations. In the regions this has created both

www.walga.asn.au

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

opportunities and challenges as identified in the inequalities presented to them. For Local
Governments the impact of technological advancements has been widespread, impacting on
community safety and service delivery functions.
Strategic Challenges
Under the Local Government Act 1995, (currently under review), the role and function of WA
Local Governments is broad and with a general competency power. There is no specification
of core services to be delivered, or any differentiation of requirements for remote-rural
councils. The vital role Councils play in economic development, community building and
strategic long term strategic and social planning, means they are significantly impacted by
withdrawal of central government services.
Workforce Development
Staff recruitment and retention, building an Indigenous workforce, building a younger
workforce, gender equity in the workforce, the special leadership skills and leadership role
required of Chief Executive Officers in remote WA is paramount to addressing regional
inequalities.
Women’s education and training has improved the concentration of women in part-time work
and female dominated industries has resulted in limited change to their relative contribution to
household income (Bamberry, 2017).
Currently subsidies are needed to attract and retain highly skilled health professionals to
regional communities. Despite this, analysis of the latest census data shows that the skills gap
between regions and cities is still growing, suggesting that subsidies are not translating into
sustainable, collaborative communities of highly skilled workers.
The demand for aged care services is expected to increase dramatically in the coming
decades such that by 2050 some 3.5 million Australians will require aged care. (Sanderson,
et. al. 2017). Adding to this, regional communities are experiencing population ageing at a
faster rate than the large capital cities.
Shifting Generational Expectations
The changing participation rates of women in the regions may be an indication of changing
cultural values and social norms and expectations around women’s rights to work. It may also
be in part due to an ‘added worker effect’ (Bamberry, 2017).
Alternatively, those born after 1980 have always grown up in economic and technological
disruption. Young people’s shifting expectations and needs, and how they prioritise and
address values (including towards ageing population (Longman, et. al., 2013) global debt and
climate change) create shifts in regional equity.

3.0 Examples and Solutions
1. Establishment of Municipal Services Officers Working Group
The Western Australian Department of Local Government, Sport and Cultural Industries have
established a Municipal Services Officers Working Group to:
 Develop a Directions Paper for the consideration of Government on proposed reforms
to the delivery of municipal services to remote Aboriginal communities.
 Develop a clear definition of the type and the standard of municipal services that is
expected to be provided to remote Aboriginal communities.

www.walga.asn.au

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58






Develop a strategy for engaging with affected local governments, Aboriginal
community stakeholders and other stakeholders on proposed reforms.
Develop an implementation strategy that outlines short, medium and long term
priorities and related responsibilities for the reform process.
Liaise with key stakeholders to facilitate coordination of and collaboration between
related programs and initiatives.
Provide advice on matters relevant to the delivery of municipal services to remote
Aboriginal communities as required.

Further, the State Government established the Regional Services Reform Unit (RSRU) in May
2015 to drive long-term and systemic change aimed at improving the lives of Aboriginal people
living in regional and remote Western Australia. As part of this process, the State Government
has committed to progressively improve basic services in remote Aboriginal communities to
appropriate standards. This commitment is being implemented through the Essential and
Municipal Services Upgrade Program (EMSUP). An initial investment of $52 million has been
approved by the State to facilitate this process.
The initial focus of EMSUP is on the following ten communities:
 Kimberley: Ardyaloon, Bayulu, Beagle Bay, Bidyadanga, Djarindjin, Lombadina,
Mowanjum and Warmun
 Pilbara: Wakathuni and Yandeyarra
Guidelines for Municipal Services appropriate for remote WA Aboriginal communities was
finalised in 2017. The Guidelines:
 Seek to ensure that the laws and regulations that are in place for the protection of the
residents of mainstream communities apply equitably to remote communities.
 Acknowledge that there may be legislative impediments to the enforcement of some
regulatory standards in some communities.
 Recognise that the level and frequency of services is impacted by the practicalities of
available resources, local capacity, community access and community size.
 Do not assume any particular service delivery model and do not pre-empt future
service or funding responsibilities.
 Recognise that improving service levels and compliance with regulatory requirements
will require increased resources and an investment in enabling infrastructure and
service capacities.
 Promote compliance with Local Government policies and Local Laws.
2. Wheatbelt Aboriginal Enterprise Development
RDA Wheatbelt have been successful in securing funding to support a three year program on
Aboriginal Enterprise Development in the Yued (Moora) and Ballardong Nyungar (Noongar)
regions of the Wheatbelt (covering initially Northam, Brookton, Cunderdin, Dowerin, Merredin,
Toodyay and York). This project will cover approximately 82% of the region’s Aboriginal
population.
Project design commenced in August 2015 with community consultation and engagement of
Federal and State Agencies, to refine and innovatively address structural disadvantage
associated with both employment opportunities and pathways for education for the Noongar
population within the Wheatbelt. RDA Wheatbelt are pleased to have been
successful through the Australian Government Department of Social Services Inclusive
Communities Grants.

www.walga.asn.au

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

A range of organisations are funded to deliver enterprise support services once a business
venture has been identified, however none of these services are physically present within the
Wheatbelt, and rely on contact from entrepreneurs, who must first locate them utilising an
internet search.
This Grant will fund a Noongar Enterprise Support field officer in each region to encourage
and support social enterprise and small indigenous business and will also provide a
mechanism for the delivery of other funded programs into the Wheatbelt (such as the IBA
Business Information Sessions that currently has no avenue within the Wheatbelt to connect
with prospective Indigenous business owners). It forms the basis for other programs designed
to reduce the gap in Indigenous employment, economic development and social participation.
Ultimately it is expected to generate a critical mass of services that will create a supportive
environment for Indigenous business, increasing economic activity and employment. Social
enterprises are expected to act as incubation hubs, stimulating and assisting with the
development of micro enterprise as the community and individuals gain confidence,
experience and commercial knowledge.
The RDA Wheatbelt solution is closely aligned to the success factors identified by the
Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage Steering Committee. In addition, further funding is
being sought (application currently with DPIRD) for the creation of a toolkit focused on
opportunities created through the release of assets as part of the South West Native Title
Settlement. The idea is to provide inspiration and ideas for the commercialisation of assets –
similar to the Enterprising Communities program completed by RDA Wheatbelt in 2017.
3. Country Local Government Fund
Since its launch in 2008, the Country Local Government Fund (CLGF) has been highly valued
as an integral component of the Royalties for Regions program, particularly by communities.
The CLGF has represented the most significant investment into country Local Government
infrastructure in this current era and has changed the landscape of regional WA communities
through the provision of renewed and new infrastructure. The ‘Local Infrastructure Asset
Renewal and New Assets’ initiative within the CLGF has been instrumental in achieving this.
There is, however, a substantial backlog still to be addressed.
The effectiveness of the CLGF for achieving regional development goals was recognised in
the Western Australian Regional Development Trust (WARDT) review of the program, which
stated ‘the CLGF has been and is an innovative and practical program addressing essential
upgrades in the social and economic infrastructure that is needed, used and appreciated by
country WA’. Furthermore, the WARDT review found that the program’s expenditure has been
well targeted: ‘to a large degree the CLGF had got it right and “what should be funded” is what
is funded now’.
4. Community Resource Centres (CRCs)
CRCs (also called Telecentres) were established in 1991 as an investment of State
Government to ensure sustainability of services, address the needs of local communities and
foster the social and economic development within local communities through the provision of
local access to technology and access to information and services. The range of services
provided by CRCs includes access to computers, high speed internet services, two-way videoconferencing, and education and training facilities, as well as Government, business and
community information and referral services.

www.walga.asn.au

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

A majority of CRCs are independently operated by their own management committee and
comprise of volunteers from the local community. In brief:
 105 CRCs in regional WA receive $11.2 million a year (approximately $100,000 per
CRC) from State Government
 $1.8 million a year for traineeships. 497 regional/remote people have had the
opportunity to be upskilled by the CRC network
 CRCs employ 395 people in regional and remote Western Australia
 74% of households in regional WA had access the CRC in the last two years
 Over 1,000 volunteers support the CRC Network
 87% of CRCs are located in towns with populations of 3,000 or less
 Each centre with at least seven significant partnerships and established connections
with business, local government, service providers and community leaders.
CRCs are ideally positioned to support State and Commonwealth Government transactional
service delivery and improve the access of socioeconomic benefits to regional, rural and
remote communities in WA. Local leadership and capacity through place based, community
led training, volunteering and videoconferencing platforms is enhanced through the
functioning of CRCs.
CRCs provide vital access to government and community services in the regions, many of
whom have either no computer, limited Internet access or limited digital literacy. With an
increase in Government services being made available through electronic formats, the support
for CRCs is becoming increasingly vital.

www.walga.asn.au

10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

4.0 Recommendations
1. To take a gendered approach to the examination of economic impacts on gender
equality and explore the impact of different phases of economic growth and
decline on gender equity in regional and rural locations.
a. Monitor how regional gender divisions of labour evolve over time and
place, being mindful of triggers and impacts to data collection, linking
this data to welfare systems, employment and other social determinants
of health.
2. Formally recognise, support and appropriately remunerate the services
provided by Community Resource Centres (CRCs).
a. Support the collective approaches of CRCs as connected State and
Commonwealth service providers in a formalised partnership agreement
b. Sustain funding and consider further funding opportunities to add value
to CRCs service provision
c. Support a CRC driven skills and facilities audit and provide assistance in
the implementation of innovative recommendations to develop collective
income generation opportunities.
3. That the Local Council Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Prevention Toolkit
be extended to rural-remote communities with high Aboriginal populations.
a. Department of Social Service funding is reinforced to provide a regional
trial site in WA where there is also a high Aboriginal population. The Shire
of Derby/West Kimberley, who submitted a request for trial site
nomination, has the highest rates of domestic violence across Australia
(ABS, 2017).
4. Advocate through Department of Education and educational institutions for the
resourcing and implementation of curriculum change to include Aboriginal
language lessons, cultural awareness training and attitudinal change towards
family and domestic violence.
a. Support regional economic development to focus on preparing regional
communities to take advantage of future opportunities. This will require
investment in higher education and regional entrepreneurship.
5. Prioritise aged care so there are opportunities for regional businesses to provide
the technology and services which allow older people and Australians with
disability to remain active and healthy.
6. National recognition of the difficulties being faced by WA farmers in the
Wheatbelt and other areas due to poor seasons, rising costs and high debt
levels; and the potential long term implications this may have on individual Local
Governments and their communities.

www.walga.asn.au

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 58

5.0 References
Bamberry, L. (2017) Examining the gendered impact of economic restructuring on regional
labour markets. Australian Bulletin of Labour, 43(1), 73-102.
Callander, E., Larkins, S., & Corscadden, L. (2017). Variations in out-of-pocket costs for
primary health care services across Australia: a regional analysis. Australian Journal of
Primary Health, 23, 379-385.
Cimons, M. (2017). Economic inequality is driving climate change. Nexus Media. Available:
https://nexusmedianews.com/economic-inequality-is-driving-climate-change-a02167047e74
Jain-Chandra, S. (2015). Why gender and income inequality are linked. World Economic
Forum online. Available: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/10/why-gender-andincome-inequality-are-linked/
Longman, J. (2013). The role of social isolation in frequent and/or avoidable hospitalisation:
rural community-based service providers’ perspectives. Australian Health Review, 37(2),
223-231. https://www.racp.edu.au/news-and-events/newsletters-and-communiques/afphm-ebulletin/afphm-ebulletin---9-march-2018
Marinus, K. (2015). Regional development in a resource production system: long distance
commuting, population growth, and wealth redistribution in the Western Australian
Goldfields. Geographical Research,54(4), 420-432.
National Rural Health Alliance Inc. (2014). Income inequality experienced by the people of
rural and remote Australia. Submission to the Senate into the Extent of Income Inequality in
Australia. http://ruralhealth.org.au/sites/default/files/documents/nrha-policydocument/submissions/sub-income-inequality-inquiry-15-oct-2014.pdf
Platt, V., O’Connor, K., & Coleman, R. (2015). Improving regional and rural cancer services
in Western Australia. The Australian Journal of Rural Health, 23, 32-39.
Sanderson, T., Reeson, A., & Mason, C. (2017). There’s a huge disparity in skilled jobs in
our cities and regions – and its growing. The ABC News Online. Last viewed April 2018,
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-12-13/australias-growing-skills-gap-cities-vs-regions-theconversation/9254740

www.walga.asn.au

12

