Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 6

West Tamar Council
PO Box 16
Riverside TAS 7250
The West Tamar Municipal Area includes the western side of the Tamar River from the suburban area
of Riverside in Launceston extending north to Bass Strait and as far west as Frankford.
West Tamar Council was inaugurated on the 2nd of April 1993 and is responsible for an area of 709
square kilometres and 457 kilometres of road network. Council’s offices are in Riverside, Exeter and
Beaconsfield.
The major industries are tourism, retailing, agriculture, fishing, world class vineyards and first class
maritime education facilities.
Index of Relative Socio-economic Disadvantage
West Tamar Council area SEIFA Index of Disadvantage measures the relative level of socio-economic
disadvantage based on a range of Census characteristics. It is a good place to start to get a general
view of the relative level of disadvantage in one area compared to others and is used to advocate
for an area based on its level of disadvantage.
The index is derived from attributes that reflect disadvantage such as low income, low educational
attainment, high unemployment, and jobs in relatively unskilled occupations. When targeting
services to disadvantaged communities, it is important to also look at these underlying
characteristics as they can differ markedly between areas with similar SEIFA scores and shed light
on the type of disadvantage being experienced.
A higher score on the index means a lower level of disadvantage. A lower score on the index means
a higher level of disadvantage.
The percentile column indicates the approximate position of this small area in a ranked list of
Australia’s suburbs and localities. It’s meant to give an indication of where the area sits within the
whole nation. A higher number indicates a higher socio-economic status. For instance, a percentile
of 72 indicates that approximately 72% of Australia’s suburbs have a SEIFA index lower than this
area (more disadvantaged), while 28% are higher.
West Tamar Council area's small areas and benchmark areas
Area
Legana - Grindelwald and District
Trevallyn
Riverside - Trevallyn
Riverside
Australia
West Tamar Council area
Exeter and District
Tasmania
Regional TAS
Beaconsfield - Beauty Point and District

2016 index
1,041.9
1,028.3
1,023.7
1,021.8
1,001.9
1,000.0
990.2
957.0
935.0
895.0

Percentile
71
63
60
58
46
45
40
24
17
9

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics, Census of Population and Housing 2016. Compiled and
presented in profile.id by .id , the population experts.

Page 1 of 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 6

Experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and unequal outcomes
in non-metropolitan areas.


Transport

There is limited public/private bus availability from the Beaconsfield – Beauty Point and District to
facilitate appropriate pickup/drop off times to support school, after school activities and
employment hours- 7 days a week.
Affordable and accessible transport is required to provide opportunities for community
members/young people to access activities/programs/services and reduces social isolation.
(Beaconsfield Community Health and Wellbeing Mapping Project 2010).


Education

Within the municipality there is limited access to years 11 and 12, there is only one nongovernment school in the municipality that offers years 11 and 12.
Post school options, Tertiary and the University are located out of area, which limits individual’s
options in educational and occupational choices due to travel and accommodation costs as a result
of the highly dispersed and non-urban population and low socio economic status.


Health Care

Within the Beaconsfield – Beauty Point and District there is limited access to specialised and allied
health care. There is difficulty in accessing General Practitioners and Specialists, and long waiting
periods for appointments.
Individuals are required to travel to Launceston or Hobart to access appointments, which is not a
major inconvenience for a one of specialist appointment, however options are very limited in
regards to transport and financial assistance if multiple appointments or treatments required.
Mental Health within the Beaconsfield – Beauty Point and District, the combination of low socioeconomic status and a geographically dispersed population of the Beaconsfield catchment area
pose both risk and protective factors to the mental health of the population. (Beaconsfield
Community Health and Wellbeing Mapping Project 2010).


Youth unemployment

Within the Beaconsfield – Beauty Point and District there is limited public transport access for
young people to attend education facilities and employment.
Youth unemployment is an issue due to the low education attainment and is demonstrated by
poor literacy and numeracy skills and low social engagement within the community.
Job seeker services are very limited within the municipality which makes it challenging for young
people to access relevant regional training programs.
 Ageing Population
The “sea change” feature which affects the Beaconsfield catchment area, has resulted in a
significant migration to the area of residents over the age of 51. This impacts on the health status
Page 2 of 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 6

of the community as this population group has specific needs in relation to health care
(Beaconsfield Community Health and Wellbeing Mapping Project 2010).

Views on cause of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and other areas




Access to transport to facilitate labour mobility and education access.
Disparity in educational levels of school leavers to continue education at a higher level.
Forecasting of low population growth has put pressure on the viability of service provision
such as education and health (RDA Tasmania Regional Plan 2017).

Policy settings which could help address inequality between regions







Government Policies and Services- requires increased collaboration and efficiencies between
federal, state and local government, and between government and the private sector.
Collaborative infrastructure projects that support broader regional liveability or economic
outcomes.
Industry growth is supported by strategic planning around areas including: skills development,
regional co-operation, research and development along with marketing and infrastructure
investment (RDA Tasmania Regional Plan 2017).
Health: improved integration of rural and urban health services.
Workforce participation plans developed in collaboration with all tiers of government and
service providers, commencing in year 7 to ensure that students from rural and regional areas
are prepared for the future.

Page 3 of 3

