Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62

Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee
inquiry into the indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia

May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

Table of Contents
1

Introduction ....................................................................................................................................................... 2

2

Response to Terms of Reference ....................................................................................................................... 3

3

Recommendations ............................................................................................................................................. 5

4

Appendix A: what are co-operative and mutual enterprises (CMEs)? .............................................................. 8

5

Appendix B: Recommendations of the Senate Economics References Committee inquiry into cooperative,
mutual and member-owned firms .................................................................................................................... 9

About the BCCM
Formed in 2013 following the United Nations International Year of Co-operatives1, the Business Council
of Co-operatives and Mutuals (BCCM) is the peak body for Australian co-operatives, mutuals and
member-owned enterprises. The BCCM represents a diverse range of enterprises operating in sectors
including agriculture, finance and banking, insurance, motoring services, health services, aged care,
disability employment, education, indigenous services, social housing and retail.
The BCCM advocates for recognition of the sector and for measures that create a level playing field
between co-operatives and other businesses, including implementation of the recommendations of the
Senate Economics References Committee report into Cooperative, mutual and member-owned firms2,
and implementation of the Hammond review into Access to Capital for CMEs.3

1

See https://social.un.org/coopsyear/
http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/Cooperatives/Report
3
https://treasury.gov.au/publication/p2017-t235882/
2

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

1 Introduction
The Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals (BCCM) welcomes the opportunity to make a
submission to the Senate Economics References Committee inquiry into the indicators, and impact
of, regional inequality in Australia.
Co-operatives exist when groups of individuals or businesses come together to achieve an objective
that they could not achieve alone. They are a rational alternative to investor-owned businesses
when the objective is different from maximising returns to shareholders. Co-operatives are often
formed as a response to the failure of a market to adequately serve the interests of a group of
customers, workers or producers – such as goods and services not being provided in the local
region. In the case of economic restructuring in Newcastle in the 1990s, HunterNet Co-operative
provided a mechanism for small and medium manufacturing and engineering businesses to work
together to find new contracts and retain jobs in the region.
The underlying purpose of co-operatives means they can provide a counterweight against regional
inequality. The McClure Review of Australia’s Welfare System final report noted that ‘in developing
intergenerational self-reliance, co-operatives help to reduce welfare dependency… provide jobs for
local people, offer goods and services and use procurement practices that support local business’4 A
region where this rings true is the Northern Rivers region of New South Wales, where co-ops like
Norco, the Northern Co-operative Meat Company and Summerland Credit Union generate over
$1.1 billion in the local economy and provide more than 2,500 local jobs.
The role of co-operatives in countering inequality (whether within countries or between countries)
is acknowledged globally. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General of the United Nations stated that,
with more than 1 billion members globally5, co-operatives promote ‘resilience in all regions and all
economic sectors’.6 Oxfam has stated that co-operatives are examples of ‘companies structured
and incentivized to benefit society as whole’ and called on policymakers to ‘encourag[e] business
models that do not provide undue reward to shareholders’ as a means of tackling inequality
alongside or prior to taxation measures.7 Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz has
remarked ‘We should learn from co-ops…If we do, we can reshape our economy, reshape
globalisation and who we and our children are.’8
A strong co-operative sector can complement re-distributive policies designed to reduce
inequality across regions. The BCCM therefore believes evaluation of the policy environment for
the formation and growth of regional co-operatives is an important consideration for this inquiry.
Our submission responds to term of reference l), any other related matters. We respond by
outlining some of the ways co-operatives contribute to reduced regional inequality, and ways in
which policy can enable or inhibit co-operatives from playing this role.

4

https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/02_2015/dss001_14_final_report_access_2.pdf , 181.
For more global co-operative facts and figures see: https://ica.coop/en/co-op-facts-and-stats
6
https://www.thenews.coop/39718/sector/ban-ki-moon-co-operatives-build-resilience-time-uncertainty/
7
https://oxfamilibrary.openrepository.com/oxfam/bitstream/10546/620170/1/bp-economy-for-99-percent160117-en.pdf, 31-2
8
https://www.thenews.coop/110090/sector/community/joseph-stiglitz-proposes-co-ops-models-alternativetrickle-economics/
5

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

We have included information about the BCCM and about the co-operative and mutual sector in
Australia following our response to the terms of reference.
The BCCM would be happy to attend a hearing to answer any questions the Committee may have.

2 Response to Terms of Reference
(l) any other related matters.
Co-operatives distribute wealth equitably. Therefore, the BCCM is of the view that an enabling policy,
regulatory and legislative environment for the growth of co-operatives is an important complement to
re-distributive policies that are designed to reduce regional inequality.
How do co-operatives distribute wealth equitably?
The purpose and ownership structure of co-operative and mutual enterprises means they can help
reduce regional inequality in the following ways:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Because they are owned by local people or businesses and exist to provide them a service, cooperatives don’t move essential services and employment out of town based on profitability
alone9
Co-operatives distribute benefits equitably to members based on level of patronage of the cooperative’s services, not shareholding10
Co-operatives put large proportions of their surplus toward community and charitable
activities11
Co-operatives are open membership organisations that give big and small players a fair go12
Co-operatives have a ‘sticky money’ effect in local economies – for every $1 spent at a regional
retail co-op, 76c of value is created in the local economy13
Co-operatives can enhance the competitiveness of local small businesses, including increasing
bargaining power and opening up export markets, as noted in the Harper Review of Competition
Policy14

Examples of co-operative responses to regional inequality

•
•

Bank Australia has committed to retaining its call centre workforce in regional Victoria,
investing $2.6 million in a new office in Moe.15
Regional Australia Bank is working with members and the community in Guyra, Bingara and
other towns to increase its branch opening hours while other banks leave.16

9

See https://www.inverelltimes.com.au/story/5347189/happy-ending-in-sight-for-bingaras-bank-drama/
For example, on average mutual health insurers pay more back in benefits than non-mutuals.
https://www.smh.com.au/business/consumer-affairs/new-figures-show-notforprofit-health-fund-members-getmore-for-their-money-20170329-gv8ymv.html
11
For example, Teachers Mutual Bank invests 6.9% of pre-tax profits into community activities, 23 times the
average for the financial services sector. https://www.tmbank.com.au/community/being-a-responsible-business
12
Almondco has 85% of Australian almond growers in membership across all sizes of supply.
http://www.almondco.com.au/
13
http://bccm.coop/wp/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Sticky-Money-Report_EY-2014.pdf
14
Co-operatives can ‘potentially strengthen the bargaining position of small businesses dealing with large
businesses’, Competition Policy Review, Final Report (Harper Review)
15
https://bankaust.com.au/about-us/news/corporate2/growing-bank-australias-future-in-moe/
16
https://www.inverelltimes.com.au/story/5347189/happy-ending-in-sight-for-bingaras-bank-drama/
10

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

•

•

•
•

The Northern Rivers Region of New South Wales has a co-operative economy worth more
than $1.1 billion, with 30,000 members and more than 2,500 jobs. Key co-op employers
include Norco, Northern Co-operative Meat Company, Oz Group, Macadamia Processing
Company, Clarence River Fishermen’s Co-operative, Ballina Fishermen’s Co-operative and
Summerland Credit Union. Norco, owned by more than 300 local dairy farmers, was the first
Australian dairy processor to export fresh milk to China.17
Small and medium manufacturing and engineering firms in and around Newcastle came
together to form HunterNet Co-operative to increase their access to contracts, increase
their standards and reduce their reliance on BHP for contracts (BHP soon after exited
Newcastle). Out of potential adversity, Newcastle is now envied for its strong manufacturing
cluster, which is a world leader in defence, infrastructure management, energy and
resources and advanced manufacturing.18
The Sea Lake community re-opened the town’s hardware store by forming a co-op to
operate the store.19
Patient-owned National Health Co-operative is expanding to towns such as Yass where
there is a need for quality bulk billing medical clinics.20

The keystone role of regional co-operatives: The Co-op, Nuriootpa
The Co-operative Community Store (known simply as “The Co-op”), in Nuriootpa, was the focus of a
study undertaken by EY in 2014 entitled Sticky Money that demonstrates the social and economic
value generated by ‘keystone’ regional co-operatives. EY estimated that for every dollar spent in the
Co-op’s Foodland outlet in Nuriootpa, an additional 76c of value was created in the local economy.
Paul Amos from The Co-op explains the purpose of the co-operative: ‘we are stopping escape spend
out of the region, which buys [our] community more prosperity’. This is what The Co-op’s mission
statement, to be ‘the Heart of the Barossa’, is about.
The EY study also demonstrated how the value created by a co-operative is not always recorded on
the co-operative’s balance sheet. The Co-op adds value to the community by stocking 40% local
produce, by stocking value-added products from local small businesses (who have gone on to supply
other supermarkets and employ more staff), donating more than $100,000 to community groups and
clubs (FY16/17), and returning value to its 18,000 members through rebates on patronage and
modest dividends on shareholding. The Co-op employs over 300 people, and often provides locals
with their first job.
The co-operative structure, with its focus on creation of social, cultural and economic value for
members and the community, is what allows The Co-op to achieve its mission of prosperity for the
local region.
An enabling policy, regulatory and legislative environment for co-operatives

Co-operatives need a level playing field with other forms of enterprise if they are to form and grow,
as was recognised by this Committee in its report from the inquiry into cooperative, mutual and
member-owned firms (recommendations provided as an appendix).21 The implementation of the
17

http://www.afr.com/business/agriculture/norco-corners-fresh-milk-niche-in-china-20140914-jeok3
https://hunternet.com.au/
19
http://www.kerryanderson.com.au/blog/2016/7/17/co-ops-up-close-and-personal
20
https://www.nhc.coop/yass-clinic-opening
21
Commonwealth of Australia (2016) Report of the Senate Economics Reference Committee Inquiry into
Cooperative, Mutual and Member- Owned Firms.
18

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

recommendations arising from that inquiry is the basis for co-operatives being able to contribute
more to Australian community and economic life into the future.
The Government’s adoption of all recommendations in the recent Hammond Review on removing
barriers to capital raising in co-operatives and mutuals is a great start.22 The $15 million Farm Cooperatives and Collaboration Pilot Program has helped spur the development of online tools to
assist groups to form co-operatives and kickstart innovative agricultural co-operatives including
data co-operatives, land investment co-operatives and co-ops for niche products such as truffles.23
However, much more needs to be done for co-ops and mutuals to reach their potential in areas
such as community buyouts, infrastructure management and the opening up of export markets for
regional small businesses. In the next section we provide our recommendations for priority policy
actions.

3 Recommendations
In the following, we provide references to the relevant recommendations of this Committee’s
report into cooperative, mutual and member-owned firms in brackets.
General recommendation – A CME Charter
Based on ILO Recommendation 193 on the “Promotion of Co-operatives”24 this Charter sets out the
principles for how government should work with the co-operative and mutual sector to promote its
growth. The BCCM encourages adoption of the Charter by all political parties:
•
•
•
•
•

Co-operatives, mutual and member-owned businesses should be able to compete freely
and on fair terms with all types of business
Government should champion these business forms on an equal basis alongside other types
of corporate ownership
Government should recognise the value of these businesses and provide appropriate
incentives for their creation and development
Legislation and regulation for these firms should match the best practice for any business,
and
It should be cost effective and straight forward to set up and run co-operative, mutual or
member-based businesses as any other type of business.

1. Amend the eligibility criteria for business support policies, grants and incentives so that cooperatives and mutual are not excluded on the basis of legal structure alone
(Recommendations 10, 11 and 12), inclusive of the following examples:
• New Enterprise Incentive Scheme25 (be open to participants using the co-operative legal
model and business educators trained in the co-operative model);
• Indigenous Advancement Strategy grants;26 and
22

Greg Hammond OAM (July 2017) Review on Report on Reforms for Cooperatives, Mutuals and Member-Owned
Firms undertaken by an independent facilitator appointed by the Commonwealth Treasurer, the Hon. Scott
Morrison.
23
https://agworks.com.au/
24
Recommendation concerning Promotion of Co-operatives, Adoption: Geneva, 90th ILC Session (20 June 2002)
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193
25
The NEIS requires that the participant have a controlling interest in their start-up business, precluding a group of
participants forming, for example, a five-member worker co-operative.
26
Co-operatives must, on the basis of their legal form, seek an exemption to attain funding of over $500,000 under

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

•

Tourism Partnership grants.27

In order to achieve the above, we recommend that Government:
(a) Conduct a one-off audit of business support policies, grants and incentives to ascertain
whether co-operatives and mutuals are excluded on the basis of legal structure alone; and
(b) Ensure that co-operatives and mutuals are considered when government is preparing a
Regulatory Impact Statement to accompany new regulatory policies.
2. Include information about CMEs on all government business websites, including
business.gov.au (Recommendation 6)
In order to achieve the above, we recommend that Government:
(a) Conduct a one-off audit of government business websites to ascertain where information
about co-operatives and mutuals is not included alongside other models; and
(b) Work with the BCCM as the co-operative and mutual apex body to provide appropriate
information on government business websites.
3. Improve access to capital for CMEs (Recommendations 4, 15, 16 and 17)
The Federal Government has committed to implementing the 11 recommendations of the
independent review into access to capital for co-operatives, mutual and member-owned firms
(Hammond Review). The BCCM and wider sector looks forward to the soonest implementation of
the reforms to provide co-operatives and mutuals with equitable access to capital for growth,
innovation and competition.
The BCCM recommends that the Commonwealth Government:
(a) Fully implement the recommendations of the Hammond Review as committed to in the
hand down of the Review in November 2017.
(b) Develops a one-off package of supports and information to establish and grow the CME
investment market. This could be much like the package that was developed to support the
development of the Social Impact Investing market.28 Such a package could support
increased investment in co-operatives and mutuals from members, intra-sector investors
and institutional investors and include information on using Co-operative Capital Units
(CCUs).
4. Remove any dual regulation of state-registered co-operatives (Recommendation 13)
For example, examine whether co-operatives are impacted by the requirements of the new
Corporations Act equity-crowdfunding regime.
5. Enhance knowledge of the impact of forms of ownership (Recommendation 1)
The BCCM recommends that Government give consideration the extent to which ownership
supports or inhibits successful, long-term value creation by business, especially in those sectors
where there is scope to increase productivity because of digital disruption, new technology and

the IAS.
Despite this being a grant to encourage collaboration among businesses, co-operatives are not eligible. This is
currently true of other AusIndustry grants.
28
http://sjm.ministers.treasury.gov.au/media-release/068-2017/
27

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

demographic change. This could be achieved by setting up an Ownership Commission29 that
examines the plurality and actual diversity of business ownership in the Australian economy.
Such a Commission could be conducted along the lines of the 2012 UK report, “Sharing Success: the
Nuttall Review on Employee Ownership”30 with a broader brief to consider all forms of member
ownership including employee mutuals.

29

The UK Labor Government established an Ownership Commission in 2010:
https://www.bitc.org.uk/resources/tools-frameworks/leadership-insight/plurality-stewardship-engagementownership-commission
30
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nuttall-review-of-employee-ownership

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

4 Appendix A: what are co-operative and mutual
enterprises (CMEs)?
Co-operative and mutual enterprises (CMEs) are businesses owned by or on behalf of their
customers, employees, a group of like-minded producers or a combination of these.
CMEs are self-help enterprises that form to meet the common economic and social needs of a
group of people or businesses. Often the group’s needs are not being met due to various kinds of
market failure.
There are 1.2 billion members of co-operatives globally.31 In Australia there are more than 2,000 cooperatives and mutuals with a combined membership base of more than 14.8 million. 32
Co-operatives are guided by seven internationally-agreed principles (incorporated into Australian
law through the Co-operatives National Law33):
1. Voluntary and Open Membership
Co-operatives are voluntary organisations, open to all persons able to use their services and
willing to accept the responsibilities of membership, without gender, social, racial, political or
religious discrimination.
2. Democratic Member Control
Co-operatives are democratic organisations controlled by their members, who actively
participate in setting their policies and making decisions. Men and women serving as elected
representatives are accountable to the membership. In primary co-operatives members have
equal voting rights (one member, one vote) and co-operatives at other levels are also organised
in a democratic manner.
3. Member Economic Participation
Members contribute equitably to, and democratically control, the capital of their co-operative.
At least part of that capital is usually the common property of the co-operative. Members
usually receive limited compensation, if any, on capital subscribed as a condition of membership.
Members allocate surpluses for any or all of the following purposes: developing their cooperative, possibly by setting up reserves, part of which at least would be indivisible; benefiting
members in proportion to their transactions with the co-operative; and supporting other
activities approved by the membership.
4. Autonomy and Independence
Co-operatives are autonomous, self-help organisations controlled by their members. If they
enter into agreements with other organisations, including governments, or raise capital from
external sources, they do so on terms that ensure democratic control by their members and
maintain their co-operative autonomy.

31
32

For this and other global statistics about the co-operative movement, see https://ica.coop/en/facts-and-figures
http://bccm.coop/wp/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/BCCM-2017-NME-Report.pdf

33

http://www.fairtrading.nsw.gov.au/ftw/Cooperatives_and_associations/About_cooperatives/Cooperatives_natio
nal_law.page

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

5. Education, Training and Information
Co-operatives provide education and training for their members, elected representatives,
managers, and employees so they can contribute effectively to the development of their cooperatives. They inform the general public - particularly young people and opinion leaders about the nature and benefits of co-operation.
6. Co-operation among Co-operatives
Co-operatives serve their members most effectively and strengthen the co-operative movement
by working together through local, national, regional and international structures.
7. Concern for Community
Co-operatives work for the sustainable development of their communities through policies
approved by their members.
Broadly speaking, there are three types of co-operative and mutual enterprise – customer owned,
worker owned and producer owned - that deliver sustainable production of goods and services to
the key stakeholders
Customer owned: The objective is service quality and price, rather than profit maximisation.
Australian examples including customer-owned banks (e.g. CUA, Bank Australia), health insurance
(HCF, RT Health), food retail (The Co-op - Barossa), primary health (National Health Co-operative)
and motoring clubs (RACQ, NRMA).
Worker owned: The objective is high quality employment that incentivises employees, provides
work place democracy and shares wealth, often whilst pursuing social goals like high quality social
care and environmental health. Australian examples are non-residential aged care provider, The
Co-operative Life, and refuse shop operator, Resource Work Cooperative.
Producer owned: The objective is to enable groups of small businesses to work together to operate
in markets that they could not enter alone or would otherwise be dominated by large investor
owned firms. Many such co-ops exist in agricultural production, where co-ops enable smaller
producers to combine their efforts to compete. Well known examples are Co-operative Bulk
Handling (CBH) and dairy-farmer owned Norco Co-operative, and in automotive purchasing,
Capricorn Society.

5 Appendix B: Recommendations of the Senate
Economics References Committee inquiry into
cooperative, mutual and member-owned firms
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government ensures that a national
collection of statistics and data is undertaken to provide an accurate picture of the scale and extent
of the co-operative and mutual sector.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that co-operative and mutuals sector be better represented in

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

government policy discussions, and is actively promoted as a possible option for service delivery
particularly where community based initiatives are being considered.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the Commonwealth Government work with states and territories to
develop a program of supports to encourage the establishment of new co-operatives and mutual
enterprises.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that a mutual enterprise is explicitly defined in the Corporations Act
2001, and its associated regulations.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the role of directors in mutual enterprises is defined in the
Corporations Regulations to align with the proposed definition of a mutual enterprise in the
Corporations Act.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Commonwealth Government work with states and territories to
ensure the continual improvement to advice, guidance and information provided at all stages in the
establishment, governance and regulation of co-operatives.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government to work with all relevant
stakeholders to undertake a program of education and training to inform them about the role of cooperatives and mutuals.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government examine ways in which it can
improve the recognition and understanding of the co-operative and mutual sector in the national
secondary school curriculum and that tertiary institutions consider the inclusion of co-operative and
mutuals in accounting, business, commerce, economics and law degrees.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that professional accreditation bodies, such as the Law Society and
Institute of Chartered Accountants, require a demonstrated knowledge of the co-operatives and
mutual structure before it will licence its members to practice accounting or law.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government amend the Indigenous
Advancement Strategy to allow registered co-operatives the same access to allow levels of grant
funding as other entities.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government review, and where necessary
amend the eligibility criteria for grants and funds across all of government grants and program
guidelines to ensure that co-operatives and mutual enterprises are not excluded on the basis of

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 62
The indicators, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission from the Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

their business structure.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the co-operative and mutual sector be considered when the
government is preparing a Regulatory Impact Statement that accompanies new regulatory policies.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government liaise with its state and territory
counterparts to ensure that the regulatory burden for small and medium sized co-operative and
mutual enterprise aligns with the needs of these organisations and ensures they are not
disadvantaged relative to companies of a similar size.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government closely monitor the progress of
the International Accounting Standards Board in developing solutions to bring co-operative shares
under the definition of capital under AASB 132, and, where possible, facilitate equivalent
amendments as expeditiously as possible.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that Commonwealth and State Governments support the
formalisation of some of innovative market-based approaches to raising capital for small and
medium sized co-operative and mutual enterprises, in the form of advice and information, as they
become available.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that APRA set a target date for the outcome of discussions with the
co-operative and mutuals sector on issues of capital raising and bring those discussions to a timely
conclusion.
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government examine proposals to amend
the Corporations Act 2001 to provide co-operative and mutual enterprises with a mechanism to
enable them access to a broader range of capital raising and investment opportunities.

Business Council of Co-operatives and Mutuals

PAGE 11

