Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

4th May 2018
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600

ABN 68 300 116 092

Via Email: economics.sen@aph.gov.au
Dear Committee Secretariat,
Re: THE INDICATORS OF, AND IMPACT OF, REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this important Senate Inquiry. Please accept this submission
on behalf of the George Town Council which I provide under delegation in my capacity as the General
Manager. I also write from my own experience: raised in a low income, single parent family in a public
housing estate located in a regional area where education opportunities, and often expectations, ceased at
year 10. I now choose to work in a similar community because, for the most part, I understand the needs
and the challenges but also know that with the right assistance, it is possible to change your life
circumstances.
With the terms of reference in mind, I have formulated this submission to champion the cause of the
broader George Town community, in line with the suggested viewpoints:
❖ experiences of individuals and localities of unequal access to opportunities and unequal outcomes
in non-metropolitan areas;
❖ views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and other
areas;
❖ analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts;
❖ examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper?
The George Town Community is a proud and resilient community who are known for their great
compassion when one of their own finds themselves in need and for possessing true grit in the face of
adversity. As decision makers and policy changers, we must find ways to provide this community, and other
regional communities like it across Australia, access to the same opportunities as their urban counterparts
especially when it comes to access to education, employment, public transport, affordable housing, and
health care.

Yours faithfully,

Justine Brooks-Bedelph
General Manager

Council Office: 16-18 Anne Street George Town Tasmania 7253 Postal Address: PO Box 161 George Town Tasmania 7253
T: (03) 6382 8800
F: (03) 6382 8899
E: council@georgetown.tas.gov.au
W: www.georgetown.tas.gov.au

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Introduction
What is regional disadvantage? The Oxford dictionary provides the following definition for the
term ‘disadvantage’: An unfavourable circumstance or condition that reduces the chances of
success or effectiveness.
The Regional Australia Institute (RAI) indicates that Regional Australia includes all towns, small
cities and areas that lie beyond the major capital cities.
This submission sets out to highlight the unfavourable circumstances and conditions that reduce
the chances of success or effectiveness for the regional community which I serve, the community
of George Town. For the purposes of this submission, when I refer to ‘George Town’ I am referring
to the whole local government area and am including all communities and residents within that
area unless otherwise stated. Data obtained and quoted throughout this submission is obtained
from idcommunity, unless otherwise stated. This demographic resource tool can be found at
https://atlas.id.com.au/northern-tasmania
George Town community profile
George Town is the third oldest Australian settlement and was named after King George III. The
George Town Local Government area covers approximately 663km2 with a relatively dispersed
population (.10 persons per ha) of 6,846. George Town township is located at the mouth of the
Tamar Estuary and is currently the only town with social infrastructure, such as schools, health
services and retail services within the local government area. Outer lying settlements, or micro
communities, along the estuary, the coastline and inland utilise service centers either in the
George Town township, or within the neighboring municipal areas of Launceston, West Tamar and
Dorset. The closest city from the township of George Town is Launceston which is located
approximately 50klm away or 40 minutes travel time, with the Launceston airport located
approximately 1 hour away.
Statistics
The latest socio-economic index for areas (SEIFA) rates the George Town area as having the lowest
score, or greatest level of disadvantage, in Tasmania. The index, created by the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS), is derived from attributes that reflect disadvantage such as low income, low
educational attainment, high unemployment and jobs in relatively unskilled occupations.
Produced in 2015, the Dropping Off the Edge report (DOTE) put together by the Australian Jesuit
and Catholic Social Services looked at social indicators including long-term unemployment,
education standards, domestic violence and criminal convictions and showed that disadvantage
has become entrenched in many communities, including George Town. In fact, the report found
that in Tasmania just six local government areas (21% of total) account for 80% of the most
disadvantaged rank positions. Dominant factors include criminal convictions, long-term
unemployment, juvenile offending, young adults not fully engaged in work or study, disability and
low family income.

pg. 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

The data, read without a plan or a goal to see this community thrive, could be overwhelming. In
2016 George Town’s unemployment rate was 12.4% compared to 7% in Northern Tasmania and
6.9% in Tasmania. Of those employed, a high percentage are within unskilled laboring and
manufacturing positions which are often associated with lower family incomes.
Additional matters impacting on the socio-economic level of disadvantage rating of an area or
community, include reduced access to public transport, family violence and crime / conviction
levels. A crosscheck using id.community confirmed that these issues have a higher rate of
prevalence within the George Town community than the Tasmanian average. Housing stress and
homelessness are also on the increase right across Tasmania, George Town included. Statistics
from id.community indicate that there are currently 200 less public housing homes than there
were 5 years ago. While some of these may have been purchased through public housing
initiatives for low income /first home buyers, anecdotal evidence provided by St Vincent De Pauls,
Neighbourhood House and Salvation Army at a recent presentation to Council indicates that there
is an affordable housing crisis growing with more people than ever seeking assistance to find
emergency housing and permanent accommodation.
The relationship between poverty and regional disadvantage
To quote Christine Kilmartin, Family Matters, article 37, the experience of poverty is closely
connected to where people live and the local resources available to them. Poverty in rural and
regional Australia has a particular set of characteristics, including:
•
•
•
•

generally lower incomes of those living in these regions;
reduced access to services such as health, education and transport;
declining employment opportunities; and
distance and isolation

These characteristics are included in and form the elements of the SEIFA score of disadvantage.
Disadvantage and poverty are intrinsically linked.
Lower incomes
30.5% of households in George Town are surviving on an income of less than $650 per week which
is ‘below the bread line’ ($752 pw for a couple with children or $358 for a single adult). ‘Poverty’
is however a relative concept and may affect more people in a community than otherwise thought
given it is generally applied to describe people who ‘cannot afford the essentials of life that most
people take for granted’. This is also known as ‘deprivation’ which occurs when most of the family
income needs to be spent on unavoidable costs such as accommodation and utilities leading to the
family having to make choices about other costs such as education, food, transport and health
care. A joint report, A snapshot of poverty in rural and regional Australia, into Rural Health carried
out in 2013 indicated that 18 of the 20 electorates in Australia with the lowest household incomes
were in regional areas.

pg. 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

The relationship between health, access to health services and regional disadvantage
As a regional community, George Town is fortunate to have a well-regarded Hospital, a Dr’s
surgery with highly skilled and caring staff and access to a variety of allied health services. These
are however located within the George Town township and there are no services at all in the outer
lying regions. The lack of public transport in the area connecting the more remote communities
makes access to medical care more difficult which can have a negative impact on health outcomes
for the whole community.
The relationship between education and regional disadvantage
It is widely understood that having a lower level of education is a recognised cause of poverty.
People with higher levels of education generally earn more and are less likely to be unemployed or
to stay unemployed. Conversely, people with no, or, low levels of education are likely to have less
capacity to escape from ‘poverty’.
Multiple studies in Australia have identified that young people living in rural and more isolated
parts of the country consistently have poorer education and labour market outcomes when
compared to their urban counterparts (Lamb & Mason, 2008). According to the demographic
resource tool, idcommunity, the George Town local government area has the second highest
percentage, at 51.1%, of people without any form of qualification and only 7.3% of the community
having achieved a University degree. Given average income levels rise proportionately to
education levels, the solution on paper seems relatively straight forward.
The Snapshot of poverty in rural and regional Australia report states that poorer educational
outcomes for young people in rural and remote areas appear to be affected by several factors:
•
•

•

The perceived lower relevance of education in rural and remote areas. Fewer opportunities
for highly educated workers reduces the motivation of students to strive for better
education.
Lower levels of commencement at university in part reflect the additional barriers to
tertiary education for young people from rural areas, particularly the impossibility for most
to live at home while at university (because of remoteness from major cities) and therefore
the need to be able to afford accommodation in the city. The development of rural
universities has reduced but not eliminated this as a problem.
The lower prevalence in rural and remote areas of jobs requiring higher levels of education
or training means that young qualified people find it difficult to return to work in rural
areas, and consequently the population of adults living and working in rural areas tends to
have lower than average educational attainment.

These factors are certainly contributing to the statistical position of George Town. Those people
who do go on to obtain higher levels of education often need to move away from the area to
obtain suitable employment which further impacts on the region.

pg. 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

There are 3 schools within George Town which cover the span of preschool through to year 12.
These are again located within the township and outer lying communities are reliant on having
access to transport to attend.
The opportunity for young people in George Town to complete years 11-12 within the area has
only become available in the last 2 years because of a State Government initiative to make higher
education more accessible. In a brief period, the evidence has been overwhelmingly positive with
a higher take up and completion rate than ever before. Policy changes and initiatives such as this,
in regional communities, are so important because it not only improves the child’s employment
prospects but gives them the confidence to pursue tertiary education. However, with the
relatively prohibitive costs associated with the pursuit of tertiary, associated with transport issues
alone if one wanted to stay within the community, it does not require extensive analysis to begin
being to understand how the disadvantages associated with living in a regional area are impacting
on this community.
The relationship between transport and regional disadvantage
Transport disadvantage occurs when a community has ongoing difficulties accessing public
transport or affordable transport. While there are buses to and from Launceston, there are only
six trips provided per day on week days (during school terms) and only two services on Saturday.
There are no buses available on a Sunday. During the week the earliest bus leaves George Town at
7.30am and the latest leaves Launceston at 6pm. The bus trip takes approximately 1 hour, and the
cost of the fair is $27.60 return, or $13.80 with concession. Qualifying students can ride cheaper,
at $1.90 each way up to age 19, however this is the age when students commence University.
With the cost of petrol currently sitting at $147.9 ltr and a return trip to Launceston covering over
100klm per day, the cost of running a car, including maintenance and parking, has become
unaffordable for many of the community’s lower income families. According to Child Family
Community Australia, young mothers and sole parents are particularly vulnerable to transport
disadvantage with the difficulties playing a key role in the growing issue of social exclusion and
isolation.
The relationship between unemployment / underemployment and regional disadvantage
While local job numbers in George Town are on average higher than most regional areas due to
the industrial precinct of Bell Bay, a high percentage of those jobs are held by people who reside
outside of the George Town area. Between the 2011 and 2016 census there were 357 less full time
equivalent jobs available in the George Town region. 250 of these came out of the manufacturing
industry which is an area where there is a higher percentage of unskilled labour. This has occurred
as a result of innovation and efficiencies introduce by industry through automation and
implementation of lean processes and there is likely to be a continued pattern of declined with the
advancement of technology. Id. data shows there was also a decline in employment in all other
industry types except for education and training which saw an increase of 47 jobs. This can be
directly linked to the extension of Port Dalrymple school extending to years 11 and 12 and the
increase in employment/ training services brought in to address the increasing unemployment
rate.

pg. 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

The relationship between Governmental Policy and regional disadvantage
Over the past four decades, public sector processes have failed to reduce the disadvantages
evident in regional Australia, despite a booming economy and a rising quality of life across the
nation as a whole. The task for current and future generations of Australians is to acknowledge
these difficulties and then move on to develop and implement government processes that produce
better regional outcomes. - Professor Andrew Beer – Delivering Better Government for Regions –
RAI discussion paper Nov 2015
The positioning paper on ‘Responding to regional disadvantage: what can be learned from the
overseas experience’ prepared by Brendan Gleeson and Chris Carmichael from the Australian
Housing and Urban Research Institute focused on the following five issues:
• the need for regional policy;
• regional policy and social disadvantage;
• targeting versus universalism;
• regional policy and housing; and
• learning from overseas experiences
The position statement on the five issues is contained within the report (link provided in reference
list) but I will focus on one element within this submission, the State Policy on housing.
The State Governments social housing policy has thankfully changed but it should be noted that
the biggest contributing factor influencing George Towns current SEIFA rating was the
concentrated development of public housing. One must question the decision to concentrate
housing 40 minutes (by car, 1 hour by bus) outside of the closest city in an area that has reduced
public transport options, lower education opportunities (until recently) which increased the
competition in the area for unskilled employment. In fact, the id. geographic analysis tool can
pinpoint, to a four-block radius within the township, the area which predominantly influences the
SEIFA result. Did this policy decision create the issue or compound an existing issue? This area of
community housing has the lowest family income in Northern Tasmania, the highest amount of
single families, the lowest education results and the highest density per population of individuals
with criminal records. It is well documented that poverty leads to higher rates of crime. This in
turn has resulted in a negative effect on the whole community through both the impact of crime
and through internal and external community perception. If both the internal and external
communities believe George Town is not a nice or safe place to live, this impacts on population
growth. When, in reality, the greater George Town area is less impacted by crime and statistically
safer to live in than other regions within Tasmania, including Launceston, and has some of the
most affordable, stunning seaside environments to live in anywhere in the Country.

pg. 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Responding to Regional Disadvantage
The recommendations that came out of DOTE2015 were, and still are, well thought through,
relevant and achievable. The report highlights that these are not issues that can be fixed over
night but will take a generation (at least 20 years) to implement change at the individual,
community and macro level and that there needs to be multiparty agreement across electoral
cycles at all levels of government. I also refer to the reports prepared by Anna Dominguez Smith –
Inquiry into the extent and nature of disadvantage and inequity in rural and regional Victoria
which outlines the common issues faced by regional communities and goes on to recommend a
range of strategies and policy position. I also refer to the report produced by the Australian
Council of Social Service (ACOSS) which is established as the national voice for the needs of people
affected by poverty an inequality.
Some of the key findings of these reports are:
•

regional development of employment and other human services requires a clear directional
statement by Federal and State governments about the long-term value of particular areas
to the social and economic wellbeing of the Australian community.

•

needed is a meshing of social and economic planning and the structures which allow local
governments and others to look at how they plan their areas and sub-areas to ensure that
disadvantage is not concentrated.

•

Expansion of traineeships, NEIS and other labour market programs involving collaboration
between the community, local industry and the trainers is needed across the widely
dispersed areas where the long-term unemployed are living.

•

Establish an independent consultative body to monitor and review legislation, government
policy and resource allocation as it impacts on rural and regional Australians.

•

Increase funding of rural and regional legal services and introduce incentives for the
recruitment and retention of lawyers to legal practices in rural and regional communities.

•

the need to enhance the competitiveness of regions through better localised
‘management and leadership’ and through some mild measures aimed at building the
capacity of regions to better compete in the globalised economy (Stilwell, 1994 pp.18-9)

•

emphasis on encouraging entrepreneurship in lagging regions, in preference to using direct
intervention and support mechanisms, foreshadowed the emergence of the ‘self help’
approach to regional policy that is favoured by the current Commonwealth government
(Tonts, 2000)

pg. 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

What is the combined leadership community, including Council, doing at the local level in
George Town?
The various community groups and leaders in George Town, including the Elected Members of
Council and its management team are unified in the same goals and pursuits to serve the
community which they represent, to raise through which ever mechanism possible, the standard
of living. This includes the increased provision of secure and stable housing, access to a variety of
educational opportunities, employment, health care, social inclusion, transport and community
services. Only when these are addressed will the most vulnerable in the community be able to
break the cycle of poverty and disadvantage.
Examples of initiatives occurring within the community to address regional disadvantage:
❖ Partnership between Beacon Foundation and Port Dalrymple School to improve
employment outcomes through aligning training and jobs availability and identify pathways
for graduating students;
❖ Partnership between Industry, RDA and Council to bring together a ‘cluster’ of employers
in order to achieve economies of scale through purchasing, collaboration of skills to enable
larger tenders ( e.g.: Defence Force ) and the establishment of a pool of skilled staff who
can work between the various employers to cover periods of leave or high/ low volume
periods.
❖ The establishment of a Future Impacts Group whose mantra is the George Town
Municipality working together our future, identifying as a community key goals, with a
common voice working together to have a collective impact. The group is made up of
representatives Industry, Schools, Child and Family Centre, Library (LINC), Council and
Community Service Agencies such as Anglicare and Neighbourhood House.
❖ Community Garden
❖ Neighbourhood Watch
Council have either already instigated or have commenced investigating the following programs
which will address elements of regional disadvantage with assistance through partnership and
grants sponsoring:
❖ Get Healthy George Town - program aimed at addressing various health issues prevalent in
George Town including obesity, lung cancer and diabetes;
❖ Increased jobs initiatives: discussions have commenced with larger employers around
incentivising employment of residents;
❖ Gender Equality and addressing Family Violence: discussions have commenced with Port
Dalrymple School and the Tasmanian Leaders Program around developing a pilot program
that utilises the Student Leaders to become involved in the role out and monitoring of;
❖ Seeking a partnership with the University of Tasmania to identify training opportunities
within the community, such as associated degrees, which align with industry needs to be
run locally as part of satellite campus trial;
❖ Establishment of a reference group to develop a Mountain Bike Trail which has the
potential to bring large numbers of tourists into the community to strengthen the economy
and increase physical activity options for locals.
❖ Establishment of a community car pool register for those traveling to and from Launceston.

pg. 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Support from State and Federal Government
It is disappointing to note that during the recent State Election, neither major party seemed willing
to acknowledge the level of need for assistance in the George Town community. While the Liberal
party pledged over $700 million to the West Tamar Community (inclusive of costs to construct a
future bridge, highway upgrades, a new school and various smaller pledges to interests groups),
less than $250 000 was made to a few minor groups within the George Town community. The
West Tamar local government area has the highest SEIFA rating in the North of Tasmania while
George Town, as previously discussed, has the lowest. How can our State Government justify
ignoring regional areas of greatest need while prioritizing the needs of those who are already
rated as having greater advantage?
There needs to be a much greater level of equitable support provided from both State and Federal
Government to the community sector to address these issues otherwise the gap between the
most advantaged and the most disadvantaged will continue to widen resulting in deepening
societal issues. Perhaps policy could reflect a greatest need type prioritization for the distribution
of funding?

pg. 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Practical recommendations to State and Federal Policy makers to address regional disadvantage
for George Town and regional communities across Australia
❖ Policy to assist regional Councils maintain and increase population through incentives,
employment creation and marketing;
❖ Financial support provided to organisations such as Northern Tasmania Development
Committee (NTDC), Regional Development Australia (RDA) and Tourism Northern Tasmania
(TNT) to continue the excellent work they are doing with population growth, industry
economic growth through clusters , supporting regional projects of priority and increasing
tourism attraction into regional areas;
❖ Continued decentralisation of Public Service departments from cities which creates
increased employment, improves access to these services for those living in regional areas
and makes the areas more attractive to settle in;
❖ Further to above, re-establish service centers that provide a full complimentary of
governmental services. These could be located within Local Government buildings or LINC
buildings and need not increase the cost of service delivery but would certainly improve
the quality and access for those in regional locations;
❖ Fuel cost reductions for regional areas to make it more affordable for people to travel for
work and education rather than move out of area and away from family and social
connections;
❖ Payroll tax reduction incentive for large employers to employ locally within areas of high
unemployment;
❖ Additional financial support for people living in regional communities to incentivise them
to pursue and complete higher education and to cover the additional costs associated with
accessing that education from a regional community (ie: internet costs, transport,
occasional accommodation associated with practical placements or attendance at out of
town lectures etc). Perhaps introduction of regional scholarships based on skills sets known
and needed within that community – similar to Rural Medical Scholarships. In George Town
it might be Agricultural Science or Electrical Engineering, for another region it might be
Marine Biology or Nursing. Depending on what the regional need is.
❖ Stamp duty reductions or building incentives (not just for first home owners) within areas
of declining population to attract new settlers and increase population;
❖ Incentives for public transport operators to increase service levels through connecting
outlying communities and additional trips into service centers / cities.
❖ Increase local Police presence and community policing programs (e.g. PCYC , Blue light
discos and Community Based Policing) in areas of high need. Why for example continue to
have an overnight manned police station in areas with lower crime and safety issues and
not in areas with the higher concern or concentrations of convictions?
❖ Greater resourcing for existing Community Service program providers such as Anglicare,
Neighbourhood House, St Vincent De Pauls, Salvation Army, Royal Flying Doctors etc
❖ Introduction of years 11 and 12 to ALL regional high schools;
❖ Establishment of remote University Campus in all regional areas utilising a range of
technology to deliver suitable courses;
❖ Increased child care options to assist people pursue further education and work
opportunities.

pg. 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 63

GEORGE TOWN COUNCIL SENATE INQUIRY SUBMISSION
INDICATORS AND IMPACTS OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Reference Material: This paper is not referenced fully but links to all articles referred to are attached
below.
http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/seifa
A snapshot of poverty in rural and regional Australia 14 October 201Rural Health Joint report :
http://ruralhealth.org.au/documents/publicseminars/2013_Sep/Joint-report.pdf
Delivering Better Government for the Regions - Regional Australia Institute Discussion Paper November
2015 - Professor Andrew Beer from the Centre for Housing
http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/wp-content/uploads/Delivering-Better-Government-to-the-RegionsFINAL-20151112.pdf
Dropping off the Edge 2015 – Jesuit Social Services & Catholic Social Services Australia
https://dote.org.au

Inequality in Australia was published in 2015 by the Australian Council of Social Service:
http://www.acoss.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Inequality_in_Australia_FINAL.pdf
https://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/images/stories/committees/rrc/disadvantage_and_inequality/submissi
ons/063_20100601_AnnaDominguezSmith.pdf
Poverty, Social Exclusion and Disadvantage in Australia - Ben Phillips, Riyana Miranti, Yogi Vidyattama and
Rebecca Cassells REPORT PREPARED FOR UNITINGCARE, CHILDREN, YOUNG PEOPLE AND FAMILIES
http://natsem.canberra.edu.au/storage/Poverty-Social-Exclusion-and-Disadvantage.pdf
Responding to Regional Disadvantage https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/2844/AHURI_Positioning_Paper_No20_Respondin
g_to_regional_disadvantage_what_can_be_learned_from_overseas.pdf

pg. 11

