Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 66

Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee –
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia

Murray River Council takes this opportunity to make a submission to the Senate Economics
References Committee – “Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia”. Council’s submission will provide comment on the Terms of Reference that are of high
relevance, but not limited to, the Murray River Council area and its community.
Introduction
On 12 May 2016, the Premier of NSW, The Hon Mike Baird MP, made the Local Government
(Council Amalgamations) Proclamation 2016 under the Local Government Act 1993, whereby
Murray Shire Council and Wakool Shire Council were amalgamated to constitute the new area to be
known as Murray River Council, effective immediately.
The Murray River Council Local Government Area (LGA) covers an area of 11,865 square
kilometres, is home to some 11,456 residents and has a wealth of physical features including
majestic sweeping plains, magnificent stands of Red Gum forests and is almost totally surrounded
by the mighty Murray River and its tributaries. It comprises three wards, Moama, Greater Murray
and Greater Wakool, with each Ward being represented by three councillors.
The main settlements in the council area include:

Moama, with a population of 5,560

Barham, with a population of 1,567

Moulamein, with a population of 593

Mathoura, with a population of 1,165

Tooleybuc, with a population of 173
A number of other small rural communities make up the council area including Bunnaloo (population
126), Caldwell (population under 100), Womboota (population 340), Koraleigh (population 276),
Goodnight (population 222), Murray Downs (population 144) and Wakool (population 470).
The Murray River Council LGA is vast and the interests, needs, populations and growth of the
various towns and small rural communities making up the council area are diverse.
Regional development policies
In rural NSW much of the impetus for development relates to Government services. Removal of
services can have a detrimental effect on the ability of communities to sustain growth or even
maintain the status quo. A recent example, which defeats the purpose of regional development, is
the decentralisation of many government agencies, such as all the services that now come under
the ServicesNSW banner. Such decentralisation has had an effect on reducing the populations of
smaller towns due to redundancy and relocation of officers to district and regional centres. As a
result, smaller communities are involved in a downward spiral due to a reduction in services.
Whilst the Murray River Council area is experiencing a growth in population, especially in Moama,
as a result of residential and tourist development, it has difficulty in maintaining essential services

Murray River Council · PO Box 21, Mathoura NSW 2710 · p 1300 087 004 · f 03 5884 3417 · e admin@murrayriver.nsw.gov.au · w www.murrayriver.nsw.gov.au

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 66

Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee –
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia

and commercial development. For example, up until six (6) months ago, the only bank within the
Murray River Council area was a branch of the National Australia Bank in Barham. The bank has
now removed its services from Barham. The Westpac Bank had removed its services from
Mathoura and Moama over 15 years ago, so consequently there is no bank within the Murray River
Council area, only agencies of the Bendigo Bank (Mathoura and Barham) and WAW Credit Union
(Moulamein) with limited services at each. This results in much uncertainty for the community,
especially the elderly, who are not often well versed in phone or internet banking services.
Infrastructure
Those that live in rural NSW have limited or no access to air services and public transport, such as
bus and rail. The unavailability of these essential transport services means that regional towns, and
the people living in them, are isolated to an extent if they do not have the means to travel and for
those that do have access to travel, it is often at a considerable cost in time and money.
The transportation of goods and services to rural towns are also a factor in the higher cost of living
for those living in the country. Rural people pay more for their food, clothes, fuel, etc, due to the
mark-up added to goods and services to factor in the travel component of such. Often this mark-up
dissuades people from purchasing from their local businesses, which generally results in a loss of
income for local business, decline in the number of staff that that business can employ and in the
most extreme cases, the closure of the business and loss of the business people from the small
town.
Education
Rural schools are required to have the same teacher to student ratios as city schools. A
consequence of this regulation is that as numbers drop off in country schools so do the specialist
teachers. The teacher-student ratio needs to be reduced in rural areas to overcome this inequality
and the subsequent loss of quality teachers, via no fault of the student’s ability or commitment to
their schooling.
The accessibility to education, especially advanced education, is difficult to obtain in rural NSW.
Some diploma and degree courses are able to be accessed online rather than face-to-face delivery,
but certainly not all. As a result, those wishing to continue with their education need to travel to city
centres, which naturally adds to the cost, so many students relocate, leaving their family base and
the community in which they have grown up in. With this in mind, regional centres tend to lose their
educated talent and labour workforce. Alternatively, many regional people choose not to continually
upskill as cost, time away from home and travel are all just too much.
Health
Generally, General Practitioners (GPs) in small rural communities that are appointed as VMO to
community hospitals are being overrun with after-hours calls, largely because they are the only GP
within the town. This ultimately leads to long hours and burnout and means that the GP has no
option but to find employment elsewhere with much better support. A community without a GP has
trouble in attracting new industries and maintaining local employment, etc. and subsequently,

Murray River Council · PO Box 21, Mathoura NSW 2710 · p 1300 087 004 · f 03 5884 3417 · e admin@murrayriver.nsw.gov.au · w www.murrayriver.nsw.gov.au

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 66

Submission to the Senate Economics References Committee –
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia

residents need to travel distances to receive general medical care, adding to the financial and
physical stress of living rurally.
Many specialist health care professionals do come to regional areas to offer their services, but such
visits are often bi-monthly and very difficult to get appointments with, leaving families with a sick
member feeling very isolated and alone and forcing those that can travel to travel distances to gain
such care. Again, an added financial and stressful burden to a rural community.
Telecommunications
The failure to provide adequate and reliable mobile telephone coverage challenges all aspects of
rural community life, from managing business requirements to attracting tourism into the area to
providing the best possible opportunities for students to achieve positive outcomes. Without
adequate mobile telephone coverage the frail and aged cannot be adequately supported in times of
medical and other emergencies and the ever present risk of a bushfire or other natural disaster is
particularly problematic for the community. A lack of mobile phone coverage limits a range of
opportunities for people living within a rural area. The cost of living increases because people are
forced to return the calls of people who either ring them on a mobile phone when it is not receiving
or who leave messages on home/business telephone numbers, which must then be returned at a
later date. Students, whether at the local school or undertaking further study, within rural areas are
disadvantaged in their access to education opportunities due to the lack of internet connectivity.
Children and Youth
A lack of childcare in small rural communities is preventing/restricting young people from returning
to work, adding to a decline in the professional community and at times a decline in the population
with families moving away from rural towns to increase their job opportunities whilst on the one
income. The lack of childcare may also discourage professionals (eg GPs, dentists, etc) from
starting up business in these communities. Low numbers of children make commercial childcare
uneconomical, there needs to be some form of alternative support that allows parents to go back to
work and ultimately keep the family unit in the rural community.
There is a lack of resources in rural areas for youth development and crisis issues. With the vast
areas that are inherent in rural areas youth and families are unable to readily access services, with
most having to travel distances to gain specialist support, again adding financial and emotional
stress to the sometimes already difficult situation. The problems of youth suicide in rural areas is
well documented and it is time that a program be put in place by the Government.
Social wellbeing
Limited funding opportunities for the upkeep and maintenance of remote rural halls and recreational
facilities, which in the past have provided an important location for rural communities to come
together and participate in sport and general social activities, has increased pressure on local
government to maintain such assets. In most cases, the people living in these remote communities
now need to travel longer distances to access such facilities, increasing the cost to families and
disconnecting community, resulting in a detrimental effect on the health and social wellbeing of
small rural communities.

Murray River Council · PO Box 21, Mathoura NSW 2710 · p 1300 087 004 · f 03 5884 3417 · e admin@murrayriver.nsw.gov.au · w www.murrayriver.nsw.gov.au

3

