Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 67

Community and Public Sector Union
Michael Tull  Assistant National Secretary

2 May 2018
Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
by email: economics.sen@aph.gov.au
Dear Committee Secretary
As the primary union representing Australian Public Service employees, the Community and
Public Sector Union (CPSU) is committed to providing a strong voice for our members in key
public policy and political debates.
The CPSU welcomes the opportunity to make a submission to this inquiry into the indicators
of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
There is no doubt that there continues to be regional inequality in Australia. The continuing
gap between capital cities and the regions is best demonstrated by the dearth of employment
opportunities in regional Australia.
Australia has had 26 years of uninterrupted economic growth, and successive governments
have implemented numerous regional development strategies. Despite this, the reality is that
employment prospects in regional Australia are manifestly unacceptable.
Unemployment is higher than the national average of 5.5% in many regional areas.1
For example, recent Small Labour Area Market statistics2 shows the unemployment rates of:
• Townsville at 8.3%;
• Cairns at 5.8%;
• Shoalhaven and Southern Highlands at 7.7%;
• Launceston and the North East at 5.9%; and
• Coffs Harbour-Grafton at 8.9%
Youth unemployment rates are even worse than the national average of 13.3%:
• In Townsville, the youth unemployment rate is 17.9%;
• In Cairns, it is 15.3%;
• In the Shoalhaven and Southern Highlands, it is 25.3%;
1

Australian Bureau of Statistics (2018, 19 April) 6202.0 - Labour Force, Australia, Mar 2018. Retrieved from
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6202.0
2
Department of Jobs and Small Business (2018). Labour Market Information Portal. Retrieved from
http://lmip.gov.au/maps.aspx#layer=EmploymentRegions

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 67

•
•

In Launceston and the North East, it is 15.2%; and
In Coffs Harbour-Grafton, it is 21.0%.

As alarming as these figures are they do not capture the full extent of the problem. These high
unemployment rates are based on labour force participation rates lower than the national
average – which was 65.7% in March 2018.3
•
•
•
•
•

In Cairns, the participation rate is 62.3%;
In Townsville, it is 63.5%;
In Launceston, it is 60.6%;
In Coffs Harbour-Grafton, it is 55.0%; and
In the Shoalhaven and Southern Highlands, it is 45.1%.

The previous Department of Employment has conceded in presentations that if labour force
participation rates in these areas of higher unemployment were in line with national average,
unemployment rates would be even higher.
Even where jobs are available in regional centres, it can be very difficult to find full-time work.
A report by Adzuna Australia4 found that:
• In regional NSW, there were 8 job seekers per vacancy compared to 3.6 in Sydney;
• In regional Victoria, it is 10.4 compared to 6.1 in Melbourne;
• In South Australia, it is 12.83 job seekers per vacancy;
• In Tasmania, it is 11.74 job seekers per vacancy;
• In Western Australia, it is 11.02 job seekers per vacancy; and
• In Queensland, it is 9.01 job seekers per vacancy.
Similarly, Departmental figures suggest that there was an average of 14 applicants per
vacancy in the Hunter region.5
2016 Employment projections also have employment growth for regional Australia to 2020 at
around half (5.8%) of the projection for employment growth for capital cities (9.5%).6
The situation in regional Australia is unacceptable. The fact is that not enough jobs are being
created in regional economies and the divide will continue to grow unless governments
actively play a role.
We cannot rely on current economic growth projections and policy settings to address the
regional jobs crisis.
Government needs to play a pivotal role
With over 14% of APS employees located in regional Australia7, the Australian Public
Service can play an important role in helping to address regional inequality.

3

Australian Bureau of Statistics (2018, 19 April) 6202.0 - Labour Force, Australia, Mar 2018. Retrieved from
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6202.0
4
Ben Phillips (2017, 26 March). Adzuna Job Report: Jobs & Salary in City VS Regional Australia. Retrieved from
https://www.adzuna.com.au/blog/2017/03/26/adzuna-job-report-jobs-salary-city-vs-regional-australia
5
Department of Employment, Survey of Employers’ Recruitment Experiences, Hunter Employment Region, March 2016
6
Department of Jobs and Small Business (2018, 9 February). 2017 Employment Projections. Retrieved from
http://lmip.gov.au/default.aspx?LMIP/EmploymentProjections
7
Australian Public Service Commission. (2018, 29 March). APS Statistical Bulletin: December 2017. Retrieved from
http://www.apsc.gov.au/publications-and-media/parliamentary/aps-statistical-bulletin/aps-statistical-bulletin-december2017/location-and-regional-staff

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 67

The CPSU believes that the Government must take an active role in using APS employment
to address regional unemployment, particularly given that Government has direct access to
the employment lever of the public service. The CPSU therefore strongly supports increased
public sector employment in regional locations. We do not, however, support a
decentralisation policy that focuses on moving existing agencies.
The public sector is itself in need of urgent repair after decades of public sector cuts have
stretched the APS beyond its policy development and service delivery capacity. The CPSU
has been campaigning to keep public service jobs in regional communities for a number of
years. Service delivery agencies such as DHS and ATO have been cutting jobs from existing
regional locations for some years. Too frequently cutting regional jobs and closing regional
offices is seen as a ‘quick-fix’ for budget pressure.
The loss of quality public sector jobs in regional and communities have a significant negative
impact on local economies, exacerbating the inequality between capital cities and regional
areas. Many regional areas suffer from higher unemployment than the national average and
have weaker job prospects. Removing federal public sector jobs merely exacerbates these
pressures. Not only does it mean there are fewer job opportunities in the community, it has
flow-on effects for other local businesses as well
In this environment, any decentralisation policy that focuses on moving existing agencies,
functions, and staff to new locations does not rebuild APS capacity, and risks exacerbating
problems.
Relocation does not provide the net increase in staff and resources needed to rebuild policy
development and service delivery capacity. Further, CPSU submits that:
• There are high transaction costs for relocation, including the risk of damage to
agency and APS capacity, and this makes relocation a costly and inefficient method
of increasing APS employment in regional locations; and
• Relocation can also involve unacceptable personal costs for affected staff and their
families.
The CPSU therefore calls for a substantial increase in overall APS staffing with regional
communities to be a priority recipient of that increased staffing. APS regional employment
should be increased through:
• Reversing regional job losses;
• Creating additional new jobs in those agencies that already have a regional footprint;
and
• To build on that footprint through establishing new agencies or functions.
There are a number of factors that would determine the optimum size of the proposed increase
in APS staffing and the proportion of that increase that should be targeted to regional
communities. The CPSU suggests that those factors should include:
• Restoring the policy development and service delivery capacity of the APS;
• Setting targets for the creation of new APS jobs in regional communities;
• Improving access to public services in regional Australia; and
• The achievement and maintenance of full employment as an express goal of
Government economic policy.
There is a growing divide between capital cities and the regions and the public sector needs
to play a larger role in helping to overcome that growing inequality. Full employment should
be the aim with the APS playing a key role. Full employment should be treated the same
way as Australia already treats its inflation target, or indeed the government's role in building

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 67

physical infrastructure. The Reserve Bank already lists "the maintenance of full employment"
as one of its objectives.8
Full employment would see an unemployment rate of between 2-3%, a substantial reduction
on the current 5.5%. At an unemployment rate of 5.5% there are 735,000 unemployed
Australians and 1,100,000 underemployed Australians9, and the situation in regional
communities is considerably worse.
Because unemployment disproportionately hurts regional communities, especially
their young people, our regions stand to benefit the most from a government committed to
full employment. Achieving full employment would see the jobless number decline to around
397,000. Achieving that outcome requires the creation of some 338,400 new jobs in addition
to the current rate of jobs growth.
Increased APS employment will need to be part of any comprehensive plan for full
employment. The CPSU does not suggest that the public sector can provide all of those new
jobs. We do suggest that government must play a key role through increased public
investment, especially in infrastructure, and through increased direct employment, and that
these efforts must be targeted at regional communities.
The CPSU is happy to provide information on the matters raised in this submission. Please
contact Osmond Chiu at
for further information.
Yours sincerely

Michael Tull
ASSISTANT NATIONAL SECRETARY

8

Reserve Bank of Australia (2017). Our role. Retrieved from https://www.rba.gov.au/about-rba/our-role.html
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2018, 19 April). 6202.0 - Labour Force, Australia, Mar 2018. Retrieved from
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6202.0
9

