Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

Contact: Des Schroder

30 April 2018

Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Submission – Clarence Valley Council
Clarence Valley Council is situated on the North Coast of NSW and has a population of 51,000 and a
large geographic land area of 10,400 square kilometres making it one of the largest councils in area
along coastal NSW. The Council is 3.5 hours from Brisbane by road, the Pacific Highway, and 8 hours
from Sydney. The Valley is also serviced by twice daily XPT train service and a regional airport.
The Council is a mixed economy valued at $1.4 billion. It has Yamba and Iluka on the coast, the
former now an iconic tourism destination and the hinterland based town of Maclean and the city of
Grafton which have a strong history of development through agriculture: beef, sugar and
commercial fishing, and now new boom crops around blueberries and macadamias. Grafton has also
had a strong NSW Government agency presence which has helped underpin the economy and some
recent decentralisation moves have aided this.
Causes of Regional Inequity
To understand why there is Regional inequity you don’t have to go any further than the SEIFA index
of which the data from the 2016 census has just been published. In NSW there is not one Regional
council area that has an index above 1,000, while all the vast majority of Sydney suburbs have
indexes well above 1,000. The Clarence Valley Council area has an overall index of 924 and in many
suburbs in the mid 850’s.
The SEIFA explains much. Regional areas have lower education standards (and low number of
University graduates), incomes that are much lower and unemployment figures which are higher,
and youth unemployment a lot higher, and a higher proportion of the community which is aged
and/or have disabilities and are on pensions. In addition regions, even desirable lifestyle
communities like the Clarence Valley, suffer from lack of doctors especially specialist medical
personnel (eg lack of psychiatrists which explains partially high suicide rates); have children who
have limited school choices and schools which on the NAPLAN results are 100 points below many
public Sydney schools and up to 200 below selective schools in all subject areas; and have to leave
home with huge accommodation costs to attend a University. If youth are talented in sports again
there are huge disadvantages being in a regional area, although the regional Institute of Sports
Centres have helped a lot but these are limited in location. A child that succeeds from a regional

....…..…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..

ABN 85 864 095 684

Locked Bag 23 GRAFTON NSW 2460
p 02 6643 0200 w 02 6642 7647 e council@clarence.nsw.gov.au w www.clarence.nsw.gov.au

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

area has to try harder and impacts much more proportionally/substantially on their parents’
incomes then a like child in the city.
In addition Government services are limited and stretched and increasingly State and Federal
Government and corporate entities, eg electricity senior management, is now based from city based
offices with regions expected to access services electronically. This sees the decline of the high paid
senior management role models that regions so desperately need.
In NSW Local Government has an increasing cost burden as State Government abandons regional
services. These are cost shifted onto Local Government who cannot afford to provide the basic
services of Government anyway, and have ratepayer base which is itself on low incomes or are
pensioners, with little ability to pay more to provide the services that ratepayers see provided and
expect from their experience in city based councils (especially lifestyle changers).
Local Government is also seeing a long term decline in grant based support from both State and
Federal Government, and a cost shift to Local Government as the burden of services withdrawn by
these levels of Government falls onto Local Government. Attached is the relative decline of the
Federal Assistance Grant (FAG) to Local Government relative to the Federal budget and this will
decline further as Sydney growth outstrips the regions and more of the base amount from the FAG’s
grant is absorbed in city based growth. It is estimated this could see a 30 percent reduction in FAG
grants to the Clarence Valley in the immediate future, the loss of over $3 million, already an
estimate of $1 million has been lost to this movement of the grant back to the city due to large
population growth in Sydney but not the regions. At a State Government level similarly grants that
support direct operating funds have declined dramatically eg library subsidies.
The NSW Grants Commission using an equity based formula estimate the Clarence Valley Council
should be getting over $20 million from the FAG’s grant. 2018/19 will be a good year where the
Council will receive $10.4 million.
Regional councils are also expected now to account for all depreciation of their assets, especially
road and bridges, which has the affect of pulling Council’s limited resources away from
‘discretionary’ community services (libraries, art galleries, youth services, aged services, disability
services, affordable housing services and economic development etc) which has cyclical affect of
further reducing services in regional areas versus the city based areas, and has the affect of reducing
the desire to move from the city to the region as the basic services are not available.
Key Points to Overcome Inequity
1. It starts with equal education for all
Inequity starts with lower education standards and options in regional areas. Kids who grow up in
lower socio-economic households generally repeat that cycle again. There needs to be greater
investment in education funding to regional areas. The ‘Gonski’ reforms were starting to work in
regional areas and were enabling schools to provide greater support to disadvantaged kids but the
reduction in funding has seen these results diminish. You only need to look at the NAPLAN results to
know more investment is needed in regional schools.
More and more parents are suburb hopping to get their children into the ‘best schools’, this is
becoming a major disincentive to parents moving to regional areas, which don’t provide the
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

comparable school outcomes. In Council we hear two things from professionals who may move to a
region, my partner cannot get a job and your schools are not up to standard, (ironically the NAPLAN
‘myschools’ website has gave evidence of this readily available. There is evidence that professional
occupations eg doctors are moving from regions to cities for their children’s education/sporting
needs creating greater shortages in these crucial skill areas already lacking in the regions (Council
knows of three doctors in the last 12 months who have moved for education of their children).
Only 12 percent of Clarence Valley students attend University compared with over 30 percent in city
based areas. The reasons are twofold, lower education standards in regions can mean regional
students are denied University access and secondly but more importantly these students haven’t the
financial ability to pay to go to generally a city based University. They have parents on much lower
income and a huge accommodation bill at a minimum, while the city based student stays at home
and can access multiple University locations. In addition they are likely to not have parents who have
attended University themselves and hence do not encourage their kids to aspire to a University
education.
Case Study Best Practice Examples in Education
The Stellar program
To help overcome the regional disadvantages of educators in regional communities Clarence Valley
Council in 2007 formed the Clarence Valley Industry Education Forum which involved Principles from
three public high schools (around 3,000 students) and the large Catholic high school (around 800
students), Northern Rivers TAFE, Southern Cross University, University of New England and Council.
The forum aimed to pool resources to advance and improve the performance of the schools, TAFE
and students in the valley and provide greater links to industry and higher education opportunities.
Out of this, besides a national award winning Aboriginal program FRESH START, has emerged the
‘Stellar’ program (aim for the stars), which originally obtained a Federal grant and now is funded by
Southern Cross University, to break down the barriers, find funding opportunities and take away the
mysteries of a University education. This program involves role model young graduates attending
each year 10 class and discussing what a University education is about and how they have funded
their degrees (two are on Council University funding grants) this has been extremely well received.
In addition, their have been parent meetings to discuss funding pathways for University attendance
for low socio-economic families. It is too early to judge success but the student and parent feedback
is very positive. These types of initiatives need funding.
Country Universities
Clarence Valley Council is actively working with a community board to form a Country University
Centre in the Clarence Valley based on the successful role model which began in Cowra. This model
has had early success in increasing the number of graduates who have studied in Cowra (using a
combination of electronic delivery and tutors) then reducing the cost of University attendance
dramatically. The program has some Federal seed money which should be continued.
2. Regions are older than cities and lose 20-30 year olds from the region
Especially in sea change communities the age structure in regions is older than the State average. In
addition, because of lack of employment for youth and education in regional areas, regions have a
3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

lower population in the 18-35 year olds. This means regions have an older population which needs
higher order health services which strains the local health system which lacks doctors and nurses
anyway, and also means they need to travel to city based areas for specialist medical treatment. In
addition, they have less disposal income to pay for these costs and demand Council services which
regions haven’t the rateable base to supply.
Similarly regions have a lack of youth based services and have higher rates of youth unemployment.
This has a twofold effect, youth leaving the region to find work in cities and secondly greater social
and mental health issues around youth that stay who cannot find work. The youth unemployment
rates are getting worse as traditional first jobs eg shop assistants are replaced with electronic service
points eg supermarket self check out.
Case Study around Youth Mental Health
Healthy Clarence Valley Initiative
Due to a large number of youth suicides the Healthy Clarence Valley Initiative was launched. This
developed a youth based strategy to overcome youth disadvantage and mental health issues in the
Clarence. This plan and lobbying resulted in the establishment of a Headspace facility and additional
youth services which were badly needed in the Clarence. The results are positive to date but while
the funding for the Headspace facility is ongoing other youth services are on an annual basis.
3. It’s about having jobs in regional areas but especially highly paid professional employment
The average wage in the Clarence Valley Council area is around $45,000 compared to an average
wage in NSW of $60,000 and over $80,000 in Sydney. The decentralisation of city based Government
agencies and businesses have a positive affect on wages, especially with Government agencies as
the equivalent city wage is paid in the region.
Case Study successful Decentralisation
Clarence Valley Council is a strong supporter of the benefits of decentralisation of public entities.
Recent successful relocations of State entities that have occurred into the Clarence Valley include:





Roads and Maritime Driver Licencing Centre (over 50 staff);
The Pacific Highway Office Project Management Team (over 50 staff);
The Department of Primary Industries – Crown Road Processing Centre (50 staff);
NSW Rental Bonds Board Processing Centre (over 30 staff).

Note though the Pacific Highway office and the Crown Land processing centres are project based
and time limited.
These professional staff not only contribute more to the economy with higher incomes, but
contribute to regional economies with much needed professional technical skills and providing
intellectual capital to underpin economic growth.
While recently there has been much debate about decentralisation of whole organisations the above
part decentralisation of arms of organisations show they can successfully work. These organisations
have had no problems recruiting staff and transfer of staff from Sydney.
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

Clarence Valley Correctional Centre has the potential to be transformational
A new regional confidence has emerged in the Clarence Valley on the back of the $4.5 billion Pacific
Highway upgrade from Woolgoolga to Ballina (which Clarence Valley is the main beneficiary) and the
new Grafton Bridge to be finished by 2020.
The community concern is for a soft landing after these once in a generation projects are completed.
The announcement and now construction of the new Clarence Valley Correctional Centre (1,700
inmates) with 1,100 construction jobs and 600 permanent jobs will transform the Clarence Valley
economy and also bring much needed new professional skills to the valley. These jobs will also lead
to higher average incomes. Helping overcome the income inequity and support new population
growth and industries.
Governments should be looking carefully at these ‘win win’ situations were an industry, which will
not be accepted readily in major urban areas, will be embraced by regional centres.
4. It’s about overcoming the tyranny of distance with fast internet connections
We have strong evidence of a new professional class moving into the Clarence Valley based around
the ability to have fast internet connection with large download and upload capacity, combined with
the ability to fly or drive to nearby cities when needed.
So in this context regions need to have the best of the best in internet connections, ideally fibre to
the house, at minimum to the curb is essential and enough towers to service our regional villages
(which to the Government’s credit has happened in the Clarence Valley). In addition for these
professions to move to the regions (eg architects, project managers, film makers etc) they need
ready access to reliable air transport at reasonable cost for business flights and slots into Sydney
airport (in our case) which allow a full days business to be done.
It would seem with the NBN roll out that regions are the last to receive the fibre roll out and if
inequity was considered they should have been the first priority. Similarly any review of airport
access needs to prioritise access to Mascot Airport and not push regional flights out to Badgerys
Creek (a real danger).
5. Special Economic Growth Needs
Regions haven’t the critical mass quite often to underpin economic growth.
Even in desirable locations like the North Coast property developers struggle to have the critical
mass to underpin essential infrastructure for developments eg sewerage trunk mains, trunk roads,
major intersections. Without a strategic investment from the Federal Regional Cities program
Lismore, Ballina and Tweed Councils would not have had critical new development areas opened up.
The recent NSW Government announcements around the Regional Economies Fund and the similar
Federal program are big steps in the right direction; with crucial funding available for employment
enabling infrastructure, sporting and cultural facilities. The weakness in this process is firstly regional
councils struggle to have the resources to prepare the onerous funding applications, to match
funding (funding needs to be near 100 percent) and then to project manage delivery (project
management needs to be allowed in funding submissions). But the biggest issue now given the NSW
Government’s push under the ‘Fit for the Future’ initiative is councils need to account totally in their

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

finances for depreciation. Any new asset not only has potential ongoing operational costs but in
many cases the new depreciation is as much as the running costs, which councils’ stretched budgets
struggle to accommodate. This can lead to councils not applying for crucial community infrastructure
in particular which further adds to inequity of services in regional areas.
A look at how Governments allocate funds from a whole of life costs and ways to support small
regional councils not only with new infrastructure but with ongoing help especially with depreciation
costs is needed, this is obviously through grants like the FAG’s or a guaranteed part of Federal taxes.
In conclusion:










Regions need to have equivalent education standards as cities, education is the great leveller,
this is not the case at present despite valiant Government attempts. Lack of equivalent
education standards in the regions is a major barrier to regional growth.
Youth employment and services, and an ageing community create their own challenges in the
regions which there is no coherent Government response to. Policy development in these areas
is badly needed as health needs for regional communities will increase dramatically as the
retired baby boomers age and youth unemployment will keep growing due to technology taking
traditional youth start up jobs.
A Government plan is needed for the regions which looks at natural advantages and promotes
these for Government agency decentralisation and industry relocation (which needs funding
incentives). The recent NSW State Government Economic Development Strategies are a good
start, but a Sydney Commission type plan for the regions is needed probably at a State and
Federal level. This could then support better funding allocation.
Comparable internet speeds, downloads and uploads equivalent to city businesses in the
regions is crucial and similarly guaranteed business flight access to the major city airports
(Mascot not Badgerys) at reasonable time slots is essential.
Councils take on a much larger role in regional communities and need special support and a
large percentage of the FAG’s grant needs to be directed to regions and it is essential that this is
not eroded but needs a dramatic increase. Already on the NSW Grants Commission calculation
Clarence Valley Council should get over $20 million based on its formula (a large part looks at
equity) but at present this is $10.4 million and at severe risk of decline due to city based
population growth way outstripping the regions, hence moving the base amount towards the
city councils not the regions. Similarly State based grants are on the decline not increasing.
While one-off grants do help councils build infrastructure is to be commended, what regional
councils desperately need is more funds to operate given their low ability to increase rates due
to socio-economically disadvantaged communities.

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 70

FAGs as a percentage of Commonwealth revenue

Global Financial Crisis
Commonwealth revenue down,
FAGs indexing maintained.

Paused
indexation

Source Data: 2016-17 Budget Paper 1, Statement 10: Historical Australian Government Data: Table 1
2016-17 Budget Paper 3, Page 69, Table: Financial assistance to local government
NSW Grants Commission: National FAG Entitlements

