Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Mandurah:

Overcoming regional inequality
Challenges and Opportunities for Sustainable Regional Growth

Regional Inequality in Australia
Senate Standing Committee on Economics

April 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Introduction
The City of Mandurah is pleased to provide a submission to the Senate Standing Committee
on Economics’ inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Mandurah is well placed to comment on this issue, having long been the subject of regional
inequality. However, Mandurah’s inequality differs from most other regions in that due to its
physical location just south of the Perth Metropolitan Region, Mandurah’s regional status has
historically been overlooked by both State and Federal Governments.
Along with its geographic and political challenges, Mandurah also faces a range of socioeconomic and environmental challenges. However, the City has in place a plan to not only
overcome these challenges, but to become a thriving, prosperous and sustainable city.
For this to occur, all three levels of government must work together. This can be achieved via
a combination of service delivery reforms, financial assistance grants reforms, an equitable
distribution of Royalties for Regions funding, and by investing in Mandurah as part of the
recently announced Perth City Deal.

Mandurah – an Overview
Mandurah is an inner-regional Western Australian city with a population of more than 83,000 1,
making it WA’s largest regional city, and the 10th largest local government area in WA. After
more than half a century of relentless rapid population growth, Mandurah’s population has
recently begun to slow, but it is nonetheless forecast to keep growing steadily to reach a
population of around 120,000 by 20362.
In addition to being an area of rapid growth, Mandurah has a disproportionately high
percentage of older residents and a low proportion of young adults. Mandurah also suffers
from high unemployment and low labour force participation.
Mandurah’s unemployment rate is currently 7.0% (December 2017), compared with the WA
average of 5.9%3. Mandurah’s labour force is currently at around 35,000, or approximately
42% of its total population. This compares unfavourably with neighbouring metropolitan fringe
local government areas such as Rockingham (51% labour force participation), Kwinana (51%),
and Cockburn (55%).
Whilst Mandurah’s low labour force participation can be partly attributed to its popularity as a
retirement destination, Mandurah has comparatively low labour force participation levels
across all age groups between 25 and 64, with particularly low participation in the 55-64 age
group4.
As a result of sustained rapid growth on the urban fringes of Perth, Mandurah face a range of
sustainability challenges, including:



1

Creating jobs and improving access to local employment;
Growing and diversifying the regional economy;
Improving education and training outcomes;

Australian Bureau of Statistics; Regional Population Growth, Australia; released July 2017.
Informed Decisions; Mandurah forecast id; October 2017.
3
Australian Government Department of Jobs and Small Business; Small Area Labour Markets Australia;
December Quarter 2017; released March 2018.
4
Australian Bureau of Statistics; 2016 Census Community Profiles; Labour Force Status by Age by Sex.
2|Page
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71









Ensuring community health and wellbeing, safety and security;
Preserving the natural environment and waterways;
Attracting and retaining young people;
Meeting community infrastructure needs;
Improving public transport infrastructure and connectivity;
Addressing social disadvantage, including affordable and crisis housing needs;
Maintaining Mandurah’s regional identity.

Despite these challenges, Mandurah has significant potential to become a dynamic and vibrant
southern city within a diverse and thriving region. However, in order to achieve this, a
supportive and collaborative State and Federal Government relationship is required.

Inequality Challenges
Due to a combination of rapid population growth, metropolitan urban sprawl and limited
government investment, Mandurah’s regional status is under threat, and its regional inequality
heightened.

Regional Service Delivery Models
Mandurah’s non-stop rapid growth has with it brought numerous challenges, and coupled with
the relentless southward expansion of the Perth Metropolitan Region, this has seen the
physical gap between Perth and Mandurah all but disappear. Concurrently, State Government
policy has resulted in essential government services being withdrawn from the Peel Region
and centralised in Perth. Examples of this include:
 Policing - Mandurah and Murray are contained within the South Metropolitan Police District,
along with Cockburn, Fremantle, Kwinana and Rockingham;
 Health – Mandurah and Murray are contained within the South Metropolitan Health Service,
along with Melville, Fremantle, Cockburn, Kwinana and Rockingham;
 Education – Mandurah and Murray are contained within the South Metropolitan Education
Region, along with Melville, Belmont, Canning, Cockburn, Fremantle, East Fremantle,
Kwinana, South Perth and Victoria Park;
 Planning - Mandurah, Murray, Serpentine-Jarrahdale and Waroona are contained within the
South Metropolitan Peel Planning Sub-Region, along with Armadale, Cockburn, Gosnells,
Kwinana and Rockingham;
 Emergency Management – Mandurah, Murray and Waroona are contained within the South
Emergency Management District, along with Cockburn, East Fremantle, Fremantle,
Kwinana, Rockingham and Melville.
This Perth-centric approach has resulted in diminished government service delivery in the Peel
Region. Whilst this has no doubt provided financial savings for the Western Australian
Government, it has impacted negatively on Mandurah and the Peel Region, both in terms of
ensuring effective regional service delivery and in maintaining our regional identity. The City
seeks a return of regional service delivery models to Mandurah and the broader Peel Region.

Australian Government Grant Programs
Mandurah has faced significant challenges when dealing with Australian Government grant
programs. The greatest challenges have been with the National Stronger Regions Fund,
Building Better Regions Fund and the Regional Growth Fund.
3|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Between 2014 and 2016, the Australian Government released three rounds of the $1 billion
National Stronger Regions Fund (NSRF), designed to promote economic development in
Australia’s regions. The City applied for NSRF funding in all three rounds for its Mandurah
Eastern Foreshore Redevelopment project, and was unsuccessful in all three rounds.
In late 2016, the Australian Government released the $481 million Building Better Regions
Fund (BBRF), designed to create jobs, drive economic growth and build stronger regional
communities into the future. Unfortunately, Mandurah was deemed ineligible to apply due to
its location within an ‘excluded area’5.
Following two rounds of the BBRF in 2016/17, in March 2018 the Australian Government
replaced it with the $272 million Regional Growth Fund (RGF), designed to fund major
transformational projects which support long-term economic growth and create jobs in regions
undergoing structural adjustment. However, Mandurah was also deemed ineligible for the
RGF.
To determine BBRF and RGF eligibility6, the Australian Government utilised the Australian
Bureau of Statistics’ Australian Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS). This is despite the
ABS’s advice that the ASGS’s purpose is solely to release and analyse statistical data, not to
determine whether or not an area is ‘regional’.
Introduced at the 2011 Census, the ASGS provides a common framework of statistical
geography structures which enables the production of statistics that are comparable and can
be spatially integrated. This includes Mesh Blocks, Statistical Area Levels 1-4, Urban Centre
and Localities (UCLs), Significant Urban Areas (SUAs) and Remoteness Areas (RAs).
To determine Round 1 BBRF eligibility, the (then) Department of Regional Development,
Territories and Local Government utilised 2011 Census SUA structures, despite the ABS’s
advice that this was inappropriate. At the 2011 Census, all of Mandurah and the western half
of Murray were contained within the Perth SUA, and were therefore deemed to be ‘excluded
areas’.
Significant Urban Areas are individual UCLs or clusters of related UCLs with a core urban
population over 10,000 persons, using aggregations of SA2s. SUAs can also include related
peri-urban and satellite development and the area into which the urban development is likely
to expand. SUAs are designed to incorporate any likely growth over the next 20 years.
Delineation of labour markets, derived from Census commuting data, is also used to determine
the composition of SUAs and Greater Capital City Statistical Areas (GCCSAs). At the 2016
Census, the Perth SUA had a population of 1.91 million.
Under the ASGS, Mandurah was defined as being part of the Perth labour market, and
therefore part of the Perth SUA. In contrast, other large Australian cities such as Gold Coast
and Geelong were defined as separate SUAs from their capital cities, primarily because
Census commuting data showed that they were separate labour markets. As a result, east
coast inner-regional cities such as Gold Coast and Geelong were deemed eligible for BBRF
funding, whilst Mandurah was not.
Local government areas (LGAs) with high unemployment and low employment selfcontainment - such as Mandurah - are more likely to be incorporated within their capital city
labour market than LGAs with low unemployment and high employment self-containment. As
a result, they are more likely to be included as part of their Greater Capital City Statistical Area.

5

Australian Government Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities; Regional Growth
Fund Mapping Tool; www.maps.infrastructure.gov.au/RegionalGrowthFund.
6
with the apparent exception of Darwin, Canberra and Hobart.
4|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

This inclusion results in inner-regional cities such as Mandurah being penalised by government
for having high local unemployment and low employment self-containment. Rather than being
supported by the Australian Government to overcome high local unemployment, Mandurah is
being punished for it, and its existing inequality is being further entrenched. Apart from using
ABS data for other than its intended purpose, the Australian Government has taken a ‘onesize-fits-all’ approach to grant funding, completely ignoring Western Australia’s unique regional
structure.
WA is the only state with an established Regional Development Commissions structure in
place, with nine distinct Development Commission Regions defined under the Regional
Development Commissions Act 1993 (Gascoyne, Goldfields-Esperance, Great Southern,
Kimberley, Mid West, Pilbara, South West, Wheatbelt and Peel). Mandurah is contained within
the Peel Region, clearly separating it from the adjacent Metropolitan Perth Region.
As a result of its inclusion within the Peel Region, Mandurah is ineligible for Metropolitanspecific funding under the Metropolitan Region Improvement Fund (MRIF). The neighbouring
City of Rockingham is eligible for the MRIF, due to its location within the Perth Metropolitan
Region.
Mandurah is also contained within the Regional Development Australia (RDA) Peel Region,
part of a national network of 55 regional committees established by the Commonwealth
Government in 2009. There are nine RDA committees in Western Australia, including one for
metropolitan Perth. RDA Peel shares the same geographical boundaries as the Peel
Development Commission Region (PDC).
Despite this, the Australian Government – via its grant eligibility criteria – has arbitrarily
determined that Mandurah is not regional.
By not utilising existing Regional Development Australia and Regional Development
Commission Region boundaries to determine BBRF and RGF eligibility in Western Australia,
the Australian Government has completely undermined the relevance of both WA’s existing
State regional structure and its own Federal RDA network in Western Australia.

Financial Assistance Grants
More than half a century of sustained rapid population growth has seriously impacted upon the
City of Mandurah’s ability to provide the necessary infrastructure for its community. The
accumulation of Mandurah’s rates revenue and its borrowing capacity have been far
outstripped by the growth of its population, and with it, the demands on infrastructure and
service provision.
‘Double-handling’ of Commonwealth funding via the states has resulted in an inequitable
funding distribution to individual local governments. The most obvious inequity lies with the
distribution of Financial Assistance Grants (FAGs).
Since the introduction of FAGs in 1974/75, their allocation as a percentage of Commonwealth
taxation revenue has gradually declined, from 1% in 1996 to 0.57% in 20177. In response, the
Australian Local Government Association (ALGA) has repeatedly - but unsuccessfully - called
for the national FAGs allocation to be increased to a minimum of 1% of total Commonwealth
taxation revenue.

7

Australian Local Government Association; 2018-19 Federal Budget Submission; December 2017; p.10.
5|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

The Australian Government’s decision to freeze FAGs indexation between 2014/15 and
2017/18 exacerbated an already difficult situation for local governments. The City of Mandurah
estimates that the indexation freeze has reduced the City’s annual FAGs grant by
approximately $280,000 per annum from what it otherwise would have been.
Whilst FAGs revenue comprises only a relatively small proportion (approx. 4%) of the City of
Mandurah’s total income, it is nonetheless an important contributor to the City’s revenue
stream. However, the current method of distributing the General Purpose grant component of
FAGs requires complete overhaul.
Under the current FAGs distribution model, there are two stages to the grant process. The
General Purpose grant component is first apportioned by the Commonwealth Grants
Commission to State and Territory Grants Commissions on a ‘per capita’ basis i.e. based on
the population of each State and Territory. However, when the subsequent intra-State
distribution occurs, these grants are then apportioned to local governments based on the
principles of ‘full horizontal equalisation’ and the ‘minimum grant’.
As a result of the existing Commonwealth-State-Local distribution method, outer metropolitan
and inner regional Councils in populous States such as NSW and Victoria automatically receive
significantly larger grants than their WA counterparts, regardless of their actual need.
The table below highlights the inequity of having two separate methodologies for inter-state
and intra-state General Purpose grant allocations. The existing model favours States with large
populations and small geographic areas, at the expense of states with large geographic areas
but small populations, such as Western Australia.
A comparison of three similar Urban Fringe Medium (UFM) councils; Mandurah (WA), Camden
(NSW) and Nillumbik (VIC) reveals the growing inequity between Western Australian and
eastern states councils. Although Mandurah currently has the largest population of the three
LGAs, it receives the smallest grant, simply because it is a Western Australian council.

Local
Government
Area
Mandurah (WA)
Camden (NSW)
Nillumbik (VIC)

Local
Government
Classification

Population
(June 2014)

General Purpose per
capita Grant Actual
Entitlement 2014/15

General Purpose
Grant Actual
Entitlement 2014/15

UFM
UFM
UFM

80,683
63,248
62,724

$20.50
$32.78
$35.36

$1,654,393
$2,073,327
$2,218,196

Source: Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development; Local Government
National Report 2014-15; p.174, 181, 187; released 2017.

Furthermore, unlike its interstate counterparts, Mandurah is a minimum-grant council, despite
having the same UFM classification, and being a similar distance from its capital centre as
Camden and Nillumbik. Mandurah has been a minimum-grant council since before 2000, and
was for many years, until recently, the only Urban Regional Medium (URM) council in Australia
to be on the minimum grant.
Western Australia currently has more minimum grant councils than any other state (31
councils), and in percentage terms (22.5%), is only surpassed by the Northern Territory
(27.8%) and South Australia (23.0%). As a percentage of total state population however, WA
has by far the highest percentage of its population (75.5%) living in minimum-grant councils8.
8

Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development; Local Government National
Report 2014-15; p.28-31; released 2017.
6|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Western Australia’s disproportionately large share of minimum-grant councils can be partly
attributed to its comparatively large number of councils (currently 138), but primarily it is the
result of the existing inequitable Commonwealth-State-Local General Purpose grant
distribution method.
To overcome the existing inequity, the Commonwealth Grants Commission should introduce
a ‘national distribution’ model, providing General Purpose grants directly from the
Commonwealth to local governments (bypassing the states), based on their relative ‘need’
(horizontal equalisation), rather than their state’s population. If the Commonwealth
Government is truly serious about overcoming regional inequality, each council should be
assessed against all other Australian councils when contending for FAGs funding, rather than
against only those councils in their respective state.
To restore regional equality, the City of Mandurah recommends the following:


Increase Financial Assistance Grants to at least 1% of total Commonwealth taxation
revenue;



Replace existing Federal-State-Local distribution with a direct National-Local
distribution model, based on full horizontal equalisation principles;



Revise the Financial Assistance Grants escalation methodology to reflect actual Local
Government cost increases;



Include long-term rapid population growth as a disability factor for the purposes of
determining the General Purpose grant allocation.

Royalties for Regions
A further example of regional inequality in Western Australia is the inequitable distribution of
Royalties for Regions funding.
The Royalties for Regions program, introduced in Western Australia in 2008, was created to
deliver the equivalent of 25% of WA’s annual royalties for regional infrastructure, services and
capacity building projects. It subsequently invested more than $6.9 billion into more than 3700
projects in regional WA9.
Royalties for Regions has three main components; the Country Local Government Fund, the
Regional Community Services Fund and the Regional Infrastructure and Headworks Fund.
Each year between 2008/09 and 2015/16, the Department of Regional Development released
its Royalties for Regions Progress Report, outlining the program’s expenditure and
achievements.
The Progress Report revealed that the Peel Region consistently receives by far the lowest
Royalties for Regions funding of Western Australia’s nine regions, both in real and per-capita
terms. In 2015/16, the Peel Region received less than one-third the R4R funding received by
the second-lowest funded recipient (Great Southern), and less than one-tenth the funding
received by the highest-funded recipient (Pilbara).

9

Government of Western Australia, Department of Regional Development; Progress Report July 2015-June
2016; p.58-89.
7|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Region

Royalties for Regions – Expenditure by Regions 2015/2016
Country Local
Regional
Regional
Total
Government
Community
Infrastructure
Expenditure
(Excluding
admin
Fund
Services Fund and Headworks
costs
of
$4,380,965
Fund
per region)

Pilbara
South West
Kimberley
Wheatbelt
GoldfieldsEsperance
Mid West
Gascoyne
Great Southern
Peel

$430,646
$485,431
$1,706,909
$1,139,921
$494,085

$42,401,677
$56,005,860
$62,105,966
$36,706,992
$24,274,623

$183,303,391
$57,373,689
$43,760,008
$59,356,805
$53,581,805

$226,135,714
$113,864,980
$107,572,883
$97,203,718
$78,350,513

$488,275
$451,902
$528,906
$373,843

$26,180,562
$14,498,027
$27,524,507
$13,088,282

$44,607,711
$49,542,032
$33,902,063
$3,396,061

$71,276,548
$64,491,961
$61,955,476
$16,858,186

Source: Government of Western Australia, Department of Regional Development; Progress Report July 2015June 2016; p.58-89.

Over the period 2008/09 to 2015/16, Royalties for Regions expenditure was allocated between
the nine Development Commission Regions as follows:

Total Royalties for Regions Expenditure by Region
2008/09* to 2015/16
Pilbara
$1691.3m
Kimberley
$972.2m
Wheatbelt
$615.8m
South West
$541.2m
Mid West
$433.2m
Goldfields-Esperance
$431.6m
Great Southern
$358.3m
Gascoyne
$350.1m
Peel
$155.0m
Source: Government of Western Australia, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development;
Regional Progress Reports; www.drd.wa.gov.au.
*2008-2009 Progress Report provided Country Local Government Fund allocations only.

Over this period, the Peel Region received just over half the R4R funding received by the
second-lowest funded recipient (Gascoyne), and less than one-tenth the funding received by
the highest-funded recipient (Pilbara).
Following the 2017 Western Australian State Election, the new Department of Primary
Industries and Regional Development has commissioned a series of evaluations of previous
regional development investment. The City looks forward to the outcome of this evaluation,
and to receiving a more equitable future funding distribution.
Mandurah is a city facing significant challenges, including limited education outcomes, high
unemployment, lack of industry diversity, limited community infrastructure provision and social
disadvantage. Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016 Census data confirmed that Mandurah’s
socio-economic index (SEIFA) condition has declined between 2011 and 2016.
8|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71

Socio-Economic Indexes for Australia:
Local Government Area Index of Relative Socio-Economic Advantage and Disadvantage
2011 SEIFA
Score

2016 SEIFA
Score

2011
State
Ranking

2016
State
Ranking

974

958

59

52

2011
State
Decile

5

2016
State
Decile

4

2011 State
Percentile

2016 State
Percentile

43

38

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; Socio-Economic Indexes for Australia, 2016; released 27 March 2018.
Australian Bureau of Statistics; Socio-Economic Indexes for Australia, 2011; released 18 July 2013.

Faced with a myriad of geographic, political, socio-economic and environmental challenges,
Mandurah has a daunting task ahead of it. However, with the right partnerships in place, the
City will overcome these challenges, and set itself on a pathway towards sustainability and
prosperity.

Overcoming Challenges
Mandurah-Murray Economic and Employment Plan
To overcome its challenges, the City of Mandurah is demonstrating leadership and taking
control of its future, via the Mandurah-Murray Economic and Employment Plan. The Plan aims
to create industry diversity and stimulate employment via targeted public and private sector
investment in identified programs and projects that respond to Mandurah’s natural competitive
advantage, and align with State and National priorities.
High-impact projects that have potential to drive economic growth and stimulate employment
will be identified and promoted. Some projects may be sub-regional in nature, whilst others
may be at the local level. The Plan has identified the following broad programs for further
investigation and potential investment:




Water Science;
Nature Tourism;
City Centre Renewal.

Under the Mandurah-Murray Economic and Employment Plan, comprehensive business cases
will be undertaken to determine the economic credentials of potential projects. On completion
of this process, investment partnerships will be sought with both the private sector and
government. The City will subsequently invite the Western Australian and Australian
Governments to invest in our city and our region, and by doing so, further stimulate the state
and national economies.

Perth City Deal
City Deals are an Australian Government initiative, designed to bring together the three levels
of government, community and private enterprise to create place-based partnerships, align
planning, investment and governance, accelerate growth and job creation, stimulate urban
renewal and drive economic reform. The Australian Government seeks to utilise City Deals to
help secure the future prosperity and liveability of cities, via six focus themes 10:

10

Australian Government Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities; City Deals;
www.cities.infrastructure.gov.au/city-deals.
9|Page

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 71








Infrastructure and Investment;
Liveability and sustainability;
Housing;
Innovation and Digital Opportunities;
Governance, City Planning and Regulation;
Jobs and Skills.

On 27 April, the Prime Minister and Western Australian Premier announced that the Federal
and WA Governments will sign a Memorandum of Understanding to negotiate a Perth City
Deal over the next 12 months. The City Deal is aimed at leveraging joint Federal/State
investment in Perth’s new public transport program, Metronet, to deliver enhanced land use
planning, affordable housing supply and smart infrastructure across Perth and inner-regional
WA11.
The Perth City Deal provides a significant opportunity for tri-level collaborative government
investment in Mandurah, which will create new industries and jobs, invest in transport
infrastructure, improve housing supply, and enhance Mandurah’s liveability and sustainability.
Investment in Mandurah via the Perth City Deal will also achieve the objectives of the
Mandurah-Murray Economic and Employment Plan, stimulating economic growth and job
creation, and reshaping Mandurah as the economic anchor to the Perth southern region.

Conclusion
Adversity brings with it opportunity. The recent announcement of a Perth City Deal, coupled
with the concurrent establishment of the Mandurah-Murray Economic and Employment Plan,
provides a significant opportunity to invest in Mandurah’s future.
To address the challenge of regional inequality in Mandurah, the City recommends the
following:







Restore regional service delivery models in Mandurah and the Peel Region;
Increase Financial Assistance Grants to 1% of total Commonwealth taxation revenue;
Introduce a direct National-Local Financial Assistance Grants distribution model;
Provide Mandurah and the Peel Region with equitable Royalties for Regions funding;
Ensure that the Perth City Deal incorporates significant investment in Mandurah;
Invest in Mandurah and the Peel sub-region via the Mandurah-Murray Economic and
Employment Plan.

Mark R Newman
Chief Executive Officer

11

Media Release; Prime Minister, Premier of Western Australia; Major Jobs and Infrastructure Boost for
Western Australia; 27.4.2018.
10 | P a g e

