Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 72

Secretariat
Secretary Ian Jones
P O Box 139
BURNIE TAS 7320
M 0412 061 501
E admin@bcci.net.au
www.bcci.net.au

President Dr Peter Holm

28/04/2018
Secretariat
Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
E economics.sen@aph.gov.au
SUBMISSION - INQUIRY INTO INDICATORS AND IMPACT OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

Dear chair
I respond on behalf of the Burnie Chamber of Commerce and Industry to the invitation to forward our
thoughts regarding the above.
One of the greatest concerns for the North West Coast of Tasmania is the small rate of growth, and
population decline, compared to that of the Greater Hobart area. There is significant concern about
several other issues, which include the noticeable lack of major road works, with almost the entire
budget being spent in the Greater Hobart area.
There is an old dictum that one should, at all costs, always maintain one’s supply lines and export
routes. The Premier has stated, on numerous occasions, that the North West area west of
Ulverstone was the economic powerhouse of the State. Meanwhile, there is growing concern that
the single lane each way Cam River bridge at Somerset, which carries more than $100m of goods
and exports from Waratah Wynyard and Circular Head every year, requires duplication (at a
probable cost of between $5m-10m). Nothing has resulted from studies and promises. In contrast,
there is yet another proposal for a Bridgewater bridge replacement, which Infrastructure Australia
says should be undertaken in the next 10 years, at a cost of $500m. There are already four bridges
over the Derwent - Bridgewater, New Norfolk, the Bowen and Tasman bridges. Surely more traffic
could be directed over the Bowen Bridge and along the East Derwent Highway at much less cost.

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 72

SUBMISSION - INQUIRY INTO INDICATORS AND IMPACT OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
If the State wants to have a splash, then it is long overdue that we develop an international standard
Convention/Conference / Exhibition Centre on the Macquarie Point site. That would indeed be
money well spent.
The Government’s “policy decision” regarding the replacement of passenger ferries for the
Melbourne-Devonport route, must seriously be questioned, for the following reasons.
The current Spirits 1 and 2, with a displacement of approximately 30,000 tonnes, when purchased,
were said to be at maximum capacity for the Mersey River, in terms of turning and depth. It is
understood the depth at some tides has delayed sailings.
The cost of dredging – more than $12m two years ago, and said to be another $8m following floods
18 months ago – and concealed in TasPorts’ “maintenance” budget, also needs to be considered.
There is also considerable extra cost in fuel from Devonport to Melbourne, compared to Burnie,
estimated at $1m annually per vessel.
The new ships will be approximately 40,000t displacement and specifically designed for the port,
which will undoubtedly increase the purchase price. Presumably they will have a service life of about
20 years. A similar ship was built in Germany between 2002 –2004 for Brittany ferries (the Pont
Aven), to ply the south coast of the UK to northern Spain across the Bay of Biscay, one of the
roughest sea passages in the world. This ship has a similar configuration and carrying capacity to the
proposed new Spirits, with a displacement of about 41,000t and cost of about $170m. Based on this
price, it is suggested the new Spirits could cost at least $300m each.
Strategically – say 20 years down the track – costs could include at least $5m pa on dredging, $5m pa
on extra fuel at 2018 prices, a total of $200m, and two worn out ships with limited marketability.
The extra cost at time of purchase - $100m each – totals $400m for a “policy decision”, based, it is
suspected, on the notion that two thirds of the Braddon electorate lives east of Penguin.
Based on these figures we would be entitled to ask why there should be such a waste of taxpayers’
money, and 5% of Tasmania’s population be subsidised by the remaining 95%.
River ports are closing and transferring to sea ports worldwide as ships get bigger, and costs for
retaining channels increase. There are plenty of examples, including Brisbane, which moved down
river, Perth, which moved to Fremantle, London (once the world’s busiest port), Bordeaux, Nantes,
La Rochelle, Liverpool, Bristol, etc. Smaller ports throughout Tasmania, such as Launceston, Port
Sorell, Port Davey, etc have long since gone.
Given the global trend of shifting from river ports to sea ports, there needs to be consideration why
the new ferries would berth at Devonport, when there is considered opinion the port could and
should be closed by 2025, giving the Government time to make alternative provisions for shipping
across Bass Strait.
Burnie is the only major port in Tasmania with room for major expansion, given Hobart’s land
congestion, Bell Bay’s restrictive escarpment and Devonport’s river limitations, a fact stated by
Tasports about two years ago. A new finger quay could be established at Burnie for the ferries, at a
probable cost of between $250m and $300m. Establishing a passenger terminal would cost little
more than upgrading the current Devonport facility, and other infrastructure such as ramps could be
installed at minimal cost.
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 72

SUBMISSION - INQUIRY INTO INDICATORS AND IMPACT OF REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
And, as mentioned, there would be an immediate saving in fuel costs given the shorter distance to
Melbourne.
The Mersey River, at Devonport, could be developed into a major pleasure craft marina and the
western shore transformed into a pedestrian area to suit the current “Living City” concept. Given the
cost of interstate moorings this could be attractive to mainland pleasure craft owners, utilising
Devonport’s airport, hospitality services and service industries, including chandlers, sail makers, boat
repair yards, etc.
Current problems include political grandstanding, lack of proper governance, parochialism, capital
citycentricity, and the influence of TasPorts.
It took years of lobbying, including hand-delivered letters from the Presidents of the three North
West Chambers of Commerce to the then Prime Minister, to instal a mooring dolphin at Burnie,
costing $1.7m, to enable larger cruise ships to berth. It has been suggested that if that had been
required at Hobart, the funds would have been found overnight!
The Legislative Council Budget Estimates Committee for GBE’s in December 2017 queried TasPorts
about progress of its 30-year “2043” plan required by the last Labour administration in 2013. The
response indicated everything was in order. However, when asked about future developments,
TasPorts stated there were “two ports” in Tasmania – one in Hobart and one in the north of the
State, the latter in three locations!
When asked again about future developments, the CEO and Infrastructure Minister Hidding
expressed concern that there would be duplication of infrastructure. Asked if it were considered a
new port should be built or a major development undertaken at an existing port, the answer was
“No. It would cost billions”. There was no mention of Burnie’s potential. That this answer was a
throw-away line without any credibility is highlighted when referring to “London Gateway”, a new
port development built by DP World on the north bank of the Thames, 40 km from the City of
London CBD. It will take the largest container ships in the world now, and at least the next
generation, its cranes are taller than the London Eye and can lift 4 x 60ft. containers at a time. The
marshalling yard is fully automated and run by computers and robots! This port is larger than
anything that will ever be built in Australia, and the cost was $2.7b.
This attitude has regularly given rise to questions about the identity of TasPorts directors, why so
many do not live in our State, why they got it so wrong and why they misled the Legislative Council?
There are many other issues, including the number of local government councils in Tasmania (29),
tying up capital and equipment, and poor school outcomes, with many not “work ready” (i.e. lack of
literacy and numeracy standards). Curiously Hobart, which is the capital city, is considered with the
rest of the State as rural and regional in relation to government grants and funding.
We apologise for this late submission and lack of supporting evidence, given we were unaware of
the inquiry until recently, notwithstanding it was referred by the Senate to the Committee on
February 14, 2018.
Yours sincerely
(Dr) W. Peter Holm MA (Cantab), Vet MB, BSc (Hons, London), BA (Hons), MANZCVS, FAVA, MAICD
On behalf of Burnie Chamber of Commerce and Industry
3

