Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 73

The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Background
I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to this enquiry. I would like to focus on education
because it is one of the critical reasons for inequality in the regions, and people ultimately leaving
the regions. There has been an awareness of this for some time, however in Western Australian it
become obvious when the previous government lowered the age children started high school to 11.
In response to this announcement families left the regions and sporting clubs contracted and many
have since folded. More recently the current government announced its decision to reduce
education services in the Mid West region by closing the Moora Residential College, which has
already seen people change their plans about staying in this part of Western Australia.
I believe that I am qualified to contribute to this discussion after having lived, worked, and made
educational decisions, including keeping children in the primary and high school educational facilities
available in regional Western Australia. My experience is based on the Northern Agricultural Region
of Western Australia.
I practice as an agricultural consultant based in Moora 170km north of Perth. I service 50 farming
businesses, mostly family farms, from Badgingarra to Wubin. In this area and with these people I
observe different degrees of isolation, responses to this and how education is managed.
Uniqueness of each region
I am not qualified to speak for areas with less population and greater distances than the northern
agricultural area of Western Australia.
Western Australia’s agricultural region is comparable to similar agricultural regions in other states,
with a low population spread over a large area. It is somewhat unique in that the higher order
settlements have small populations too far apart to adequately meet the social needs of people in a
way which is comparable to those with access to larger regional cities in eastern Australia or the
Perth metropolitan area.
Societal change
15 years ago it was considered unacceptable both socially and for business, to not live in the rural
community where I practice my profession. Today, there is no such resistance and in fact an
expectation that I should move away to educate children.
While the trend is for a less egalitarian society in general, the gap is strongly evident when it comes
to education. There is a great difference in the quality of education between public country schools
and city based private schools and many city based public schools.
This is due to several reasons, most notably:
Lower quality of teaching staff, often due to high rate of turn-over
Insufficient resources for teaching important subjects.
Lack of sporting activities.
Small peer group.
Many professionals, trades-people and farmers consider this gap too wide. Subsequently people
with the means opt for city-based schooling. This results in children boarding in Perth, families being

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 73

split as the mother moves to Perth while the father drives-in and drives-out to work in the region, or
the family leaves the region altogether.
This creates vicious cycles. Firstly, the declining numbers mean that governments invest less in these
schools which leads to less enrolments, particularly for ATAR subjects, along with more trying
teaching conditions for often less-experienced staff.
Socially the town and region enter a vicious cycle as friends and families leave. This is one of the
hardest things about living in regional Western Australia. People who you have strong social
connections with, especially during the years of child-rearing and family life, move on. This can leave
people isolated and somewhat alone as this cohort contracts significantly.
Another vicious cycle, which is more difficult to speak about and address is the quality of the
remaining peer group. Less good citizens enrolling students in a school means other families are less
likely to enrol their children there.
Example - Moora Residential College
It is wise for this enquiry to access the Economic Impact Statement prepared for the Moora Shire
Council in March 2018 for the benefit of the Western Australian government in response to the
proposed closure of the residential college. The social costs have been considered to some extent,
but they reach further than this.
This enquiry needs to be aware of the economic and social cost of losing volunteer workers when
families leaving for education. The people leaving are typically net contributors in terms of charitable
work.
Non-academic issues
Non-academic issues are significant when it comes to education in public schools relative to private
schools. The social, sporting, and moral or values training differences are large and need to be
considered.
Socially, country towns have the advantage of people mixing across age groups. However, with small
populations there are limited numbers of people to interact with. Some cohorts, such as those with
high school age children, suffer more, which can lead to a sense of isolation, especially as those
remaining watch people leave the region.
Sporting activities are an important means of social interaction. With small populations sporting
activities are limited and of very low quality. It is inexcusable for government policy to allow depopulation in the regional centre of Moora, where indigenous people comprise 20% of the
population, to get to the point that it cannot provide a team sport for 13-year-old boys!
Country towns without a private school option are vulnerable to losing people as they react to
inappropriate values training in public schools. An example of this is the reaction to the Safe School
program.
Potential Solutions
Government has the demographic information which shows the holes in the population which are
related to education. It also knows that the significance of the baby-boomer generation which is now
exiting these regions. This cohort has made up a high proportion of the population in the agricultural
region and as it leaves there needs to be a contraction of services. The rate of population decline in

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 73

the agricultural regions will slow after the baby-boomers leave and those remaining will be keen for
the rationalisation of services.
They will want investment in the regional centres which will remain viable well into the future.
Governments need to sit down with stake-holders and manage which regional centres are
geographically and economically important for the longer term and concentrate heavy investment in
education and health here.
In Western Australia Cooperative Bulk Handling, CBH, has had to manage the difficult politics of a
similar rationalisation with its grain handling network. They have invested in fewer larger centres
where people have more equitable distances to travel for a good level of service. I suggest this
enquiry consider how CBH did this and look to doing similar for education and health.
I have discussed with many of my clients what they would do if government invested in strategic
high-quality schools which matched the quality of the private schools in Perth, and well over half
were strong supporters. This should be explored.
The appropriate inland towns would grow in response to heavy investment to create a “Perth”
standard education service. Spend what it takes to provide quality teaching staff, boarding facilities,
and face-to-face teaching for all subjects. In Western Australia, this is likely to include Moora,
Merredin, Narrogin, and Katanning, but it depends on the strategic geographic importance and the
distances to all parts of the agricultural region. These inland public boarding schools would then
attract boarders, potentially from metropolitan areas as well. More students will provide the social
and sporting interaction so desperately needed. It would be possible for these institutions to provide
sporting, drama, debating opportunities with each other or with Perth schools. Perth students
competing in the country would learn about this aspect of life.
Funding is likely to become apparent after reviewing the current spending on education. For
example, consideration should be given to redirecting the current boarding allowance subsidies to
these more accessible facilities. Those losing the subsidy will gain by having a facility somewhat
closer to home, and tax payers in the towns will not be subsidising families to leave the district for
greater opportunity than their own children.
Also, in closing, governments and unions would better serve regional communities by working hard
to deliver permanent positions for staff who are prepared to commit and serve in regional
communities. The turn-over of staff is a failing.

Yours sincerely,

David Cameron

