Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 74

Dear Sir, Madam,
I am writing to you regarding the deplorable cuts to education for disadvantaged, rural and remote
children in Western Australia.
On the 13th Of December 2017, the WA Labour government saw fit to announce the closure of the five
Schools Of The Air, six of the seven camp schools, Lansdale Farm School, Moora Residential College
and the Herdsman Wildlife Centre. There were also cuts, paraded as budget repair to the PEAC
program, VACCSWIM programs and the trust funds of many of the regional agricultural colleges.
The long reaching effects of these cuts to education will not be, in my opinion, obvious to the general
public until they have become a thing of the past.
Families will leave the bush to provide their children an equal education to those in the city, this will
impact local businesses and export markets, resulting in a future where WA production will drop and
the country as a whole will suffer.
The general disregard and arrogance of the current government regarding rural and remote education
has been staggering. The decision to close the SOTAs was reversed, due to a titanic backlash from the
families and communities affected. The decision to uphold the removal of the others from the
responsibility of the Department Of Education is short sighted, misinformed and unfortunately still
current.
The Camp Schools provide an opportunity for isolated, disadvantaged children, some with disabilities,
to socialise, to excel, to participate in challenges, to find leadership skills, to work in a team and find
their own place in a wider environment preparing them for a chance for excel in an environment
otherwise inaccessible to them.
To market this devastation to the education sector as ‘budget repair’ given the recent injection of
Federal funds is something that needs close scrutiny. The ‘bush kids’ deserve the same quality of
education and all the ‘extras’ that are readily available to their peers in the city. The rural and remote
students are isolated only by geography and therefor have little or no contact with peer groups and
friends. The Camp Schools provide the only way to prepare the kids for life at boarding school.
I have two sons, both with MSOTA, who have gleaned massive benefits from the Geraldton Camp
School in their primary years. My eldest, year five has learned that a social group is not a terrifying
institution, and that belonging, and mentoring is an essential skill to coping in a larger world. My
youngest, Year two has had an equaled introduction into a community otherwise unavailable to him.
The loss of these educational facilities is not only detrimental to my children, but to the community as
a whole, and I implore you to take a closer look at this wide reaching and potentially devastating
decision for the future.
Once these facilities have been sold off, there will be no opportunity for us to give our children the
equality of education that they deserve.
Regards,
Caroline Ward

