Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

CESSNOCK CITY COUNCIL
SUBMISSION
In response to
Senate Economics Reference Committee
Inquiry on
“Indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia”

April 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Introduction
The Cessnock City Council (CCC) welcomes the opportunity to provide a submission
in response to the Senate Economics Reference Committee – “Inquiry into the
indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.”
In recognition of the importance of this Inquiry in setting clear direction to support a
more equitable and sustainable future for regional areas, the CCC provides the
following submission for your consideration.
OVERVIEW – THE HUNTER REGION NSW
The Hunter Region is Australia’s largest regional economy, with an economic output
of over $99.157 billion pa and 1. The ABS 2016 Census estimates the population for
Hunter Region at 707,666 people, up 6.1 percent from 2011. The region is situated on
Australia’s main east coast transport corridor. It has sophisticated infrastructure,
international gateways including an airport and the third largest deep see port in
Australia. Comprising of 10 local government areas, divided into the Upper Hunter
and Lower Hunter sub-regions, the Hunter is the fastest growing region in NSW
outside of the Sydney Metropolitan area.
CESSNOCK CITY COUNCIL LGA
Cessnock Local Government Area (LGA) covering an area of approximately 1,950
square kilometres sits within the heart of the Hunter Region and is home to Hunter
Valley Wine Country. Cessnock LGA is in the Lower Hunter along with Newcastle,
Maitland, Port Stephens and Lake Macquarie LGAs. Together these LGAs comprise
the greater urban area of Newcastle with this area having the potential to
accommodate more than 160,000 more people within the next 25 years.
Cessnock LGA is located 153 kilometres north of Sydney, 50 kilometres west of
Newcastle and 27 kilometres south west of Maitland. Cessnock LGA is highly
accessible by road from Sydney, Newcastle and the New England area. The LGA is
within 35 minutes of the Port of Newcastle and 50 minutes of Newcastle Airport. The
LGA has rail connections to both the Port of Newcastle and to Sydney.
From 2011 to 2016 the usual resident population of Cessnock increased by 8.5% from
50,840 people to 55,567 people. Based on the 2016 Census, there were 22,525
households in the region. Cessnock’s population is on the rise and the LGA ranked
16th highest rate of growth in NSW between 2006 and 2016, following our
neighbouring Hunter population centre of Maitland with 24.9% and ranked 8th in
NSW2. ABS data shows that Cessnock LGA experienced 19.7% growth in population
ABS 2013 / 2014 National Input Output Tables, ABS June 2016 Gross State Product
(REMPLAN)
2 Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2016 (ABS cat. no. 3218.0)
1

Page 1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

over the ten years, NSW only experienced 15.0%, and Australia 18%. Cessnock LGA’s
growth between 2006-2016 was at a higher rate than Greater Sydney with 18.2%
and the rest of NSW 9.0%.
The Hunter Regional Plan (2016) establishes the NSW Government’s vision for the
region, and identified the potential for 6,350 additional dwellings for Cessnock LGA
by 2036. The plan also projects an additional 13,150 people and a need for 6,592
additional jobs. The Hunter Regional Plan advocates for the strategic locations of
both Cessnock and Kurri Kurri as regionally significant centres and employment land
clusters.
SNAPSHOT OF CESSNOCK LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREA
 As at December 2016, the Gross Value of Product for Cessnock LGA was $2.489
Billion. Whilst Rental, Hiring and Real Estate had 18.9% of the Value Add, the
Manufacturing sector also represented a high 13.6% of the total Value Add. This
was followed by Mining with 10.0% of the Value add and Construction 9.2%.
When modelled individually the Tourism sector ranked 5th on the Value Add with
8.9% contribution that includes over 150 wineries and cellar doors supporting
2,811 jobs.


As at December 2016, the total output of gross revenue to the region’s economy
was $5.828 Billion. Manufacturing was the most important sector, contributing
31.5%, Construction 11.9%, Rental Hiring and Real Estate Services 10.9%, and
Mining 10.3%. Accommodation and Food Services attributed 6.7%, and when
modelled individually the Tourism Sector represented 8.5% of the gross revenue in
the Cessnock LGA.

ECONOMY
Cessnock’s Gross Regional Product shrunk by 6.8 % during the period between July
2014 ($2,475.714) and August 2015 and only recovered in December 2016 having
stabilized back to $2,489.511 million. REMPLAN data reveals during this period,
Mining continued to retract across all key economic indicators in the LGA including
output, wages and salaries, local sales and regional exports. Notably, the LGA’s
total value added for mining decreased by 48.66% % between July 2014 and
December 2016 - $211.36M in dollar terms. The Mining sector contributes $525.081
million (21.3%) of total regional exports in December 2016, a notable drop of 35.1%
and a staggering $284.505 million.
Key propulsive sectors are sectors amongst the top contributors to the economic
activity in relation to backward linkages, exports, employment and value-added
and those to which can provide greatest opportunities to optimize the local
economy. Somewhat counterintuitively, and disturbingly, REMPLAN’s analysis of the
Cessnock LGA economy provides that the Mining sector’s position as a significant
key propulsive sector has increased between July 2014 and December 2016, rising
from fifth to second position. With a declining Mining sector moving into a top
Page 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

position, it all the more imperative that Cessnock take critical action to future-proof
its economy and develop an attractive and diverse environment for growth and
investment.
Below are the top five key propulsive sectors in the Cessnock LGA, as at December
2016:
1.
Construction
2.
Manufacturing
3.
Mining
4.
Accommodation & Food Services
5.
Health Care and Social Assistance
EMPLOYMENT DATA – ABS LABOUR FORCE SURVEYS
In the March 2017 quarter, the unemployment rate in Cessnock City was at 6.6%.
In the July 2017 quarter unemployment rates are: 4.2% for the Hunter Region
(excluding Newcastle); 5.0% for New South Wales, and; 5.6% nationally.
Cessnock City unemployment rate remains higher than both New South Wales and
national unemployment rates, as it has for a number of years.
Cessnock LGA’s top five employing industries are, as at December 2016:
1. Accommodation & Food Services (14.5%)
2. Retail trade (13.9%)
3. Manufacturing (12.8%)
4. Health Care & Social Assistance (11.2%)
5. Education & Training (8.8%)
Cessnock LGA’s top five wages & salaries paying industries are, as at December
2016:
1. Manufacturing (16.4%)
2. Health Care & Social Assistance (11.5%)
3. Education & Training (10%)
4. Construction (9.4%)
5. Retail Trade (8.4%)
The recent mining downturn hit the Hunter region hard with more than 2,500 Hunter
miners losing their jobs.
The high unemployment rate can be explained in part by successive mine closures
and the loss of some high employing companies such as Hydro Aluminium, and the
continuing operations of the Abel mine located in Beresfield remaining tenuous.
Table 1: Direct coal mining employment figures – Upper and Lower Hunter3
3

Data provided by Coal Services

Page 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

30-Jun-12
31-Dec-12
31-Dec-13
31-Dec-14
31-Dec 15
31-Dec 16

Hunter

Newcastle

NSW

13,553
12,416
11,991
10,598
10,522
10,691

2,993
2,700
2,472
2,060
1,648
1,362

24,989
22,982
21,952
19,604
19,303
18,957

Y OUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
Youth unemployment is also a major issue nationally and locally. For the Hunter
Region, outside of Newcastle, youth unemployment in 2015 had risen to 21.8% and
was the highest in NSW, according to figures released by the Australia Bureau of
Statistics. It has now been smoothed by other factors including seasonality and
increasing under-employment (unmeasurable), causing what appears to be an
under calculation of 10.7%.
UNDEREMPLOYMENT
Unemployment data is distorting the view on an under-employment crisis.
Unemployment rates tend to be connected to cyclic industrial booms and
contractions within the economy and under-employment reflects more part-time
jobs in the workforce. The classification for unemployment is not working more than
one hour per week, actively looking for work in the previous 4 weeks and be
available to start work; hence it may not be capturing the full breadth of underemployed individuals.
Many Australians who participate in the workforce on a casual or part time basis
may be under-employed. Whilst under-employed individuals cannot be counted
towards the official unemployment rate, under-employed persons may be unable to
get a permanent or full time job, or get the numbers of hours they need or want.
According to new ABS figures the under-employment rate had risen from 176,000 in
the late 1970s to 1.1 million. Sydney University’s Professor John Buchanan says
Australia has one of the highest levels of part-time work anywhere in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) forum of 35
countries.
EDUCATION AND QUALIFICATIONS
Cessnock LGA is experiencing dynamic change within education and employment
population variables. There has been an increase in the number of residents with
types of qualifications and employment.




1. Between the 2006 and 2016 census, Cessnock LGA experienced the following
changes across residents’ employed by sector:
37.7% increase in residents employed in Health Care and Social Assistance jobs
(+713 jobs)
49.5% increase in residents employed in Mining jobs (+684 jobs)
Page 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76




























39.1% increase in residents employed in Construction jobs (+509 jobs)
28.6% increase in Accommodation and Food Services jobs (+490 jobs)
78.2% increase in residents employed in Administration and Support Services jobs
(+392 jobs)
41.1% increase in residents employed in Education and Training jobs (+358 jobs)
27.4% increase in residents employed in Other Services (+237 jobs)
29.8% increase in residents employed in Public Administration and Safety jobs
(+233 jobs)
23.6% increase in residents employed in Professional, Scientific and Technical
services (+141 jobs)
46.3% increase in residents employed in Electricity, Gas, Water and Waste
Services jobs (+88 jobs)
39.4% increase in residents employed in Arts and Recreation Services jobs (+71
jobs)
31.9% decrease in residents employed in Manufacturing jobs (-809 jobs)
23.0% decrease in residents employed in Wholesale Trades. (-124 jobs)

2. Cessnock LGA’s residents also gained in higher education status with the
following changes between 2006 and 2016:
49.9% increase in residents with a Certificate Level qualification (+3,986 persons)
72.9% increase in residents with an Advanced Diploma or Diploma (+1,180
persons)
59.7% increase in residents with a Bachelor Degree (+929 persons)
66.8% increase in residents with a Graduate Diploma or Graduate Certificate
level (+139 persons)
151.9% increase in residents with a Post Graduate Degree (+281 persons)
3. Cessnock LGA’s residents also saw changes by those employed by
occupation:
38.8% increase in the number of Community and Personal Service workers (+707
jobs)
29.5% increase in number of Professionals (+555 jobs)
23.1% increase in number of Clerical and Administration workers (+451 jobs)
18.5% increase in number of Machinery Operators and Drivers (+444 jobs)
15.0% increase in number of Labourers (+393 jobs)
10.9% increase in Technicians and Trades workers (+382 jobs)
22.8% increase in number of Managers (+364 jobs)
17.6% increase in number of Sales workers (+329 jobs)

Cessnock LGA is experiencing dynamic change within education and employment
population variables. There has been an increase in the number of residents with
types of qualifications and employment consistent with the needs of government
administration. This trend is set to continue for the 2016 Census (to be released).

Page 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

CESSNOCK ECONOMIC SPATIALITY
Cessnock LGA has a long history of coal mining, manufacturing, construction,
agriculture (e.g. grazing, poultry), viticulture and related tourism activities, all of
which are still its primary employment sectors. Cessnock town centre is the
administrative, retail and service centre for the LGA with Kurri Kurri town centre being
an important secondary retail node and the industrial heart of the LGA.
TOURISM
The Hunter Tourism Region attracts approximately 2.3 million visitors per year, of
which 1.4 million visit the Hunter Valley Wine Country.4 Wine Country is one of the
highest profile wine destinations in Australia, with Pokolbin being the focal point for
wine tourism within the Region. The area is also known for high profile entertainment,
concerts and events with a range of attractions and activities that bring non wine
visitors into the area.
MINING SECTOR
At 2016 Census, 2,065 (10.1%) of the 20,501 employed people living in Cessnock LGA
were employed in the Mining sector. Of these, 62.5% travelled to Singleton LGA, 9.9%
travelled to Muswellbrook, 9.6% worked in mines within the Cessnock LGA, 4.3% Lake
Macquarie and 3.6% to Maitland.
DISENGAGED Y OUTH
Cessnock City has a high proportion of disengaged youth with 14.4% total persons
aged 15 to 24 years disengaged from work and study. According to the SEIFA
indexes, the figures are higher where socio economic status is lowest.
Cessnock City Council has developed a model and distributed the Youth First
Employment Toolkit to all Councils across Australia, with up to 50 of these Councils
intending to implement the Toolkit to mitigate youth unemployment in their various
LGA’s.
The Toolkit supports long term unemployed to be job ready and securing them paid
work at the end of 10 weeks. The program includes intensive skilling and exposure to
the expectations of a real workplace. When developing the Model, Council had an
unexpected 80% success rate.
BUSINESS CAPABILITY STUDY
In 2014/15 Cessnock City Council undertook a Business Capability Study (BCS) to
determine the capacity of businesses currently operating within the Cessnock local
government area.
With a paucity of business data available, the need to nurture the local government
area’s current businesses and commence a process to attract appropriate
4

Wine Country area is made up of Cessnock LGA and approximately 15% of Singleton LGA)

Page 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

investment into the region; an up to date, accurate and comprehensive profile of
businesses was required.
The total number of businesses identified in the survey was 2,517, a response rate of
90.4%, with 2,340 responding and 177 businesses not responding.
Of the 2,340 businesses surveyed, Retail Trade was the largest ANZSIC category of
business with 18.20% (426), followed by Accommodation and Food Services with
16.32% (382) and Other Services with 16.11% (377). The fourth largest category was
Construction with 10.34% (242), then Manufacturing with 5.43% (127) followed by
Administrative and Support Services 4.53% (106) of businesses.
Of the 2,340 businesses surveyed, there were:
1,510 (64.53%)
Micro business
(5 or less employees)
415 (17.74%
Small business
(6 to 20 employees)
107 (4.57%)
Medium business
(21 to 100 employees)
16
(0.68%)
Large business
(greater than 100 employees)
292 (12.48%)
Did not respond.
SKILLS AUDIT – CESSNOCK CITY LGA STUDY
Council is currently undertaking a Skills Audit of all business across the Cessnock LGA.
Whilst this study has not been completed (completion date 30 June 2018), Council
has received 1,111 survey responses from a total business base of 2,533. This will
identify skills shortages, future skills require and allow for an innovative web portal to
support training, business engagement and jobs.

EXPORTERS IDENTIFIED IN THE CESSNOCK CITY COUNCIL BUSINESS CAPABILITY STUDY
The survey identified 65 (2.97%) exporters. Of those 35 are in the wine industry
exporting to over 36 countries. Other exporters are in the Arts and Creative
industries, Traditional manufacturing, Tourism, Business Advice Services, Health,
Agriculture and a dog breeder. All exporters identified are providing products and
services to multiple countries.
TIME SERIES – A LOCAL SNAPSHOT
A time series analysis of Cessnock LGA’s economy via the Cessnock Business
Capability Study (2014) and the Gap Analysis (2016) has shown a growth rate for
new business entries of 22.78% between 2014-2016. The top five business sectors have
changed between 2014 and 2016.
Of the 2287 businesses surveyed in Cessnock LGA in 2014, the top 5 largest ANZSIC
divisions by number of business were:
1.
Retail Trade – 18.28% (418 businesses)
2.
Accommodation and Food Services - 16.70% (382 businesses)
3.
Other Services - 16.31% (373 businesses)
Page 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

4.
5.

Construction – 9.93% (227 businesses)
Manufacturing - 5.38% (123 businesses)

Between 2014-2016, some sectors have expanded in the numbers of businesses, and
others have contracted.
The top 5 notable increases in business numbers were:
1.
Arts and Recreation Services grew by 67.78% (+61 businesses)
2.
Health Care and Social Assistance grew by 39.29% (+33 businesses)
3.
Education and Training grew by 36.00% (+27 businesses)
4.
Other services grew by 17.16% (+64 businesses)
5.
Accommodation and Food Services grew by 15.18% (+58 businesses)
The growth in numbers of businesses across Arts and Recreation, Other Services,
Accommodation and Food Services and even Retail could be attributed to a rise in
the importance of the visitor economy in the Cessnock LGA greater economy. These
sectors attract and support the visitor economy through associated activities in arts
and cultural activities, support services such as celebrants and hairdressers, and
enhanced demand on general accommodation, restaurants, and associated retail.
A growing population such as in Cessnock LGA would catalyse an increase in
demand and justify more services in Health Care and Social Assistance and
Education and Training.
SOCIO ECONOMIC ISSUES AFFECTING CESSNOCK LGA

39.7% of Cessnock’s population earns less than the minimum weekly wage
(NSW 36.1%)

Cessnock has 2,100 jobless families equating to nearly 1% (0.82%) of
Australia’s jobless families;

HSC completion rate is 38% (national rate is 69%);

Poor health indicators

25% of working age population on benefits;

Unemployment at 6.6% (March 2017).
Education levels in Cessnock LGA have traditionally been lower than the State
average, in 2016, 27.7% of people aged 15+ years in Cessnock City left school with
only Year 10 or equivalent qualifications, compared with 17.3% in NSW. The total
number of people with Year 12 or equivalent School Completion in 2016 was 12,159,
or 21.9% of the total (41.9% for NSW).
At 2011, Cessnock LGA has the lowest rates of persons aged 25-34 who have
attained a Bachelor Degree or Higher across the Hunter Region. Between 2006-2011
there had been a 10.6% increase in people with tertiary qualifications in Cessnock
LGA.

Page 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Of the 128 LGAs in NSW, Cessnock LGA rates:
 2nd lowest in the Index of Education and Occupation (relates to level of
qualification achieved, further education being undertaken/achieved
and employment skill levels).
 33rd lowest in the Index of Relative Socio-economic Disadvantage (relates
to low income, low educational attainment, unemployment, unskilled
jobs, low levels of English proficiency, single parent families, rents, etc.).
 28th lowest in the Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and
Disadvantage (relates to economic and social conditions of people and
households - income, home and car ownership, educational levels, skilled
employment, type of work, rent payments, etc.)
 71st lowest in the Index of Economic Resources (relates to financial
aspects of relative socio-economic advantage and disadvantage - home
ownership and household income.
MINING LEGACY
It is well documented that mine closures are often devastating for local communities
with high levels of long term unemployment, poverty, social exclusion and a decline
in community resources. This is especially so in remote or regional areas where mines
are the mono-industry. Owing to the high level of dependency on the mine there
may be a lack of both entrepreneurial tradition and experience in a mining town.
Further, due to the relative prosperity of mining towns and the support provided by
the mine, local government might be less pro-active in community development
than when mines are not present. This is further exacerbated that when mines close,
those community members who are most able to mobilise community action and
support local development, are those that are most likely to leave the town as the
mines close.
Whilst previous mining leases were issued by state government subject to conditions
that companies support the financing of local community infrastructure, there was
little, if any, support for future social or economic outcomes that would ensure the
long term economic and social resilience of LGA’s.
With over 100 years of mining in the Cessnock LGA, there is a recognition that with
this extensive period of resource extraction has come a substantial legacy. As a
result, the legacy of the post mining booms are the long term impacts that have
curtailed the economic prosperity of the Cessnock LGA, impacted the ability of the
Council to cope with infrastructure requirements, as well as instigated long term
negative social impacts.

Page 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

TERMS OF REFERENCE


Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital
cities and other areas

In determining what is best practice for regional growth and development it is
primary to define the term “region” and the interrelationships between regions (and
what is included in the regions) and metropolitan areas of Australia. There is
generally no consistent label, even amongst governments of defining what is
classified as “regional”, “rural” or “remote.” This is because regions and their
distributive resources, connectivity, access, infrastructure and population densities all
differ across Australia.
The Australian Standard Geographic Classification - Remoteness Areas (ASGC-RA) is
a geographic classification system that was developed in 2001 by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics (ABS), as a statistical geography structure which allows
quantitative comparisons between 'city' and 'country' Australia. The use of ASGC-RA
replaced the earlier Rural, Remote and Metropolitan Areas (RRMA) and
Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia (ARIA) classification systems.
An example of the inconsistencies of what is considered “regional” and distributive
injustices of government services is in the accessibility remoteness index of Australia
(ARIA) which cites our townships of Weston - Kurri Kurri as “Major Cities of Australia”.
Under this system Kurri Kurri townships were omitted from receiving opportunities in
accessing critical additional health services, despite still only having maximum
populations of under 12,000 people. Neighbouring major regional centre Cessnock
was classified as “Inner Regional”.
Generally, regional areas may lack entrepreneurial investment in critical
infrastructure taken for granted in major capitals. Unless regions have incurred
opportunities to leverage private investment, retain and sustain industries that
remain productive, or are able to capture resilience through diversification of
economy; many have experienced decline. Cessnock City is one which faces major
social and economic devastation under post-mining, post-smelter, postmanufacturing legacies combined with a lack of investment in critical infrastructure
to support diversification and sustain industries into the future.

Page 10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76



Examples of solutions: what has caused some regions or towns to prosper

Other regional areas have capitalised on their isolation, become early adopters of
decentralised services and embraced their isolation in geography to become prime
locations for Universities, and government entities. A key NSW example is Bathurst,
which has continuously evolved with the sustained enhanced job opportunities for
professionals within its various government offices, the intellectual assets provided by
the university and the cultural capital in both motor sport and beautiful heritage
amongst its attractions. Whilst the goldfield history has left, Bathurst has managed to
retain its quality of life, cohesive sense of community and connectedness to the rest
of Australia. Cessnock has greater potential to deliver on population growth than
Bathurst, and has not only a higher population, but also a higher population change
between 2006-2016 (19.7% vs. 14.8%).
In comparison, Cessnock’s heritage was built during an era of mining prosperity,
most of which has crumbled in the many years since – resulting in urban decay and
lack of critical investment in beautification projects. Council’s modelling shows
Cessnock LGA and the greater Hunter Region remains intertwined with the mining
sector’s fortunes; when mining is down, so are the economic prosperity, growth and
employment opportunities for the region. Unfortunately, the gentrification of
Cessnock’s townships has been much slower, and only much recently occurring at a
faster rate as a result of population growth and tourism industry demand.
In Cessnock LGA, major industries grew after mining declined, creating new
transferrable jobs such as at the aluminium smelter at Kurri Kurri. The smelter closed in
the previous 6 years due to rising energy costs which supported 500 workers directly
employed. The Federal and Victorian Governments announced a $230 million
bailout for Alcoa in the Victorian shire of Glenelg which supported 600 jobs5. What
has been overlooked is that the decision supports direct jobs but also a multitude of
flow on jobs that are a result of industrial and consumption effects from all those
workers. Unfortunately for Kurri Kurri, the kick on effect has resulted in visible hardships
on the township and the opportunity now exists to enhance urbanisation as a
lifestyle centre as a result of its unique proximity of the Hunter Expressway to the
town.
Technology and innovation
The Western Australian government pledged $16.7 million to support emerging
technology startups6. Of that amount, $4.5 million was allocated to “drive innovation
in the regions”, the Treasurer said in his budget speech in Parliament. They also are
spending $19 million on primary school STEM and coding programs in order to
prepare the next generation for the jobs of the future.

http://blog.id.com.au/2017/economic-analysis/how-much-is-an-aluminium-worker-worth/
https://www.smartcompany.com.au/startupsmart/news-analysis/wa-government-commits16-7-million-support-emerging-tech-startups/
5
6

Page 11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Driving growth in this regional sector could provide an important boost for the
Western Australian economy. This is particularly important considering the state’s
dependence on the resource sector. Unfortunately, the investment occurring is a
significant amount, only assumedly made as a consequence of the utility available
to the Western Australian Government as a result of mining provisions. This investment
will no doubt push WA ahead of the rest of Australia, and not just in the regions, in
terms of technology based economic drivers. It also demonstrates the equity
injustices experienced across Australia, and hardest felt in the regions that could
most use the investment and diversification.
As a regional centre, Toowoomba has invested in infrastructure and fostered an
entrepreneurial business culture and is successfully luring Brisbane’s professionals out
of the city7. Toowoomba has re-energised its local economy by positioning itself as a
self-reliant regional centre, with improved global access through its freight based
airport, boosting productivity, multiplying benefits of other infrastructure, growing the
visitor economy, and attracting new businesses and working professionals.
In doing so, Toowoomba also increased its population. Toowoomba is now
recognised as a lifestyle capital, with the region being ranked the fourth most family
friendly city in Australia. Not only realising economic and population growth, it
continues to leverage the unique advantages of its population by continuing to
attract a highly skilled workforce. Between 2006 and 2011, 36% of working residents
who moved to Toowoomba from Brisbane were professionals.
Toowoomba and Cessnock share the same liveability factors, whilst Cessnock has a
regional airport, Toowoomba’s regional airport has now had international airport
service growth and excellent accessibility. Both regions are located proximally to a
major capital, and offer affordability with median house prices below average (yet
appreciating every year). The new residents attracted to Toowoomba though, have
higher incomes and expendable resources, and this creates greater demands for
investment in order to provide the residents with their expected demand for goods
and services. Toowoomba have received a $500 million Grand Central
redevelopment, which provided residents with 160 retailers. Leveraging investment
from the private sector has enabled Toowoomba to continue to achieve growth,
continued enhanced quality of life and self-sustainability as a regional centre.

7

http://blog.id.com.au/2017/economic-analysis/toowoomba-taking-off/

Page 12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Cessnock City Council’s economic development unit has undergone an extensive
process of change in order to realise better economic development outcomes.
Advance Cessnock City is the partnership formed of the Cessnock LGA Council and
the local Chambers of Commerce and business associations. Advance Cessnock
City looks to establishing foundations for solid economic development, understand
the economic base, and communicate effectively with businesses, governments
and institutions. To develop and implement business retention, growth and
investment programs, this partnership is there to create an environment conducive
to good business. In order to nurture the area’s current businesses and commence a
process to attract appropriate investment into the Hunter region; an up to date,
accurate and comprehensive profile of businesses was required. Stemming from the
paucity of business data available, Cessnock City Council undertook a Business
Capability Study. The results have helped the Council and the partnership to better
understand the capacity of their local industries. It has also enabled council to
effectively engage its business community and achieve greater participation in
economic development programs.
The advantage of the unique capacity of economic development in Cessnock has
been tested with the 2015 flood event which affected much of the Hunter Region.
Cessnock City Council was able to survey 38% of their total business community
about the flood. 76% of respondents reported their business had been impacted by
the storm which is estimated to result in a $39 million damage bill to businesses across
the city. This was replicated inter-regionally when Cessnock Council was invited to
perform the same for the neighbouring council Dungog. The partnership has
legitimised Council is supportive of business and a trustworthy advocate for their
needs.



Analysis of the economics of regional inequality, including wider impacts

A holistic approach to the country’s national growth overall helps to build a fairer
society in which no region’s citizens are left behind. This means that improved
governance and service delivery are indeed equitable for all.
If equitable funding and support was provided to regions in line with cities, in
addition to affordable real estate, rents, lower labour costs, lower capital costs and
greater economies of scale that regions offer, other benefits would include:
 Regional job creation and mitigation of high unemployment levels;
 Indirect employment arising from increased construction and building;
 Greater diversification of industry away from reliance on mono-industries;
 Consumption of local goods and services significantly higher as a result of
higher average wage, adding further growth to the local economy;
 Attraction of professionals and an increase in skills and knowledge base for
the region;

Page 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76



Increase in population increases the demand for more schools, hospitals,
shopping centres and expansion of community services. This would provide
more equity between a regional centre and a major city;
 A change of perception of the region adding cultural worth to regions as well
as a progressive place to live and work and quality of life, driving professionals
looking to escape congested cities and lengthy commutes to more spacious,
convenient locations that offer improved lifestyle. This would also enhance
the ability of the region to attract other businesses;
 Would offer talented young people local professional careers that would
greatly incentivise them to remain or return to the regional area following
higher education pursuits. This would also provide opportunities for city based
young people to move to larger regional areas as an alternate to city life and
the increasing unaffordability of city living, particularly housing.


Policy settings which could help address inequality between regions

Business investment attraction to regions is vital for the continuing prosperity of
regional areas.
There are many constraints to growth in Cessnock LGA relating to lack of ongoing
levels of investment in critical infrastructure.
How do you attract businesses and industry (and subsequent jobs) to establish in a
region and which support regional growth and economic development when:
 Governments continue retracting or merging services and reducing
presences and subsequent jobs in regional centres? Eg. Service NSW,
Medicare/Centrelink.
 Public transport is extremely limited?
 Critical utilities and connections are missing? Eg. Power, water, sewer
 Basic infrastructure backlogs are significant? Eg. Roads
 Industrial and commercial lands are non-existent or inappropriate for
purpose?
 Governments refuse to maintain or expand in demand, essential services? eg.
Healthcare
 There are significant internet, phone and mobile black spots?
 Skills shortages are rampant after successive industry retractions?
 Socioeconomic disadvantage, high unemployment, and youth
unemployment leave communities devastated?
Addressing these critical shortfalls would make serious headway in responding to
some of the issues that are emerging and growing the divide of inequity between
cities and regions.
However, there is indeed much that the Commonwealth can provide that would
encourage greater business investment to regional areas such as:
Page 14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Incentives:
a. payroll tax reductions;
b. cash rate loans for purchasing of buildings and renovations;
c. easily accessible funding grants towards relocation costs;
d. higher R&D tax-offsets if undertaken in a regional centre;
e. tax-offsets for employee relocation costs;
f. contributions towards salaries in the first 12 months post relocation to each
employee, hired from the host community;
g. Increased funding to the host community for local skill development.
Access to funding/business support:
a. Major banks in regional areas have business banking specialists in industry
areas such as agribusiness and manufacturing. The Commonwealth
could provide support to local entities such as Chambers of Commerce,
Business Enterprise Centres and industry associations located in regional
areas for the provision of meeting rooms and hot desks for such specialists
to use for financing as would be available in major capital centres.
b. In most regional areas there are very strong and pro-active business
support services provided by such entities as Chambers of Commerce.
Federal funding for these entities to attract experts to visit on a regular
basis from cities to provide one-on-one advice and mentoring to local
businesses could be implemented. An example of this, is the successful
Western Downs Regional Council’s “Western Downs Innovation Advisory
Service” that provided access to tax, marketing, WH&S, Intellectual
property, research, exporting specialists that would visit on a fortnightly
and/or monthly basis with the local Council’s economic development
setting up appointments for the local businesses.
Infrastructure:
For the success of economic zones and the attraction of businesses that would
reduce the divide between cities and regions and enable sustainable growth and
development in regional areas, is investment into efficient and appropriate
infrastructure. Responding to growth will require long-term, incremental
improvements in capacity, safety, asset condition and resilience of road, rail and air
transport infrastructure, particularly along key transport corridors. It is essential that
government provide an ongoing commitment for the continuation of a longer term
outlook on infrastructure priorities to support regional growth and prosperity.

A partnership approach with all three levels of government is vital, particularly the
local government. This partnership would utilise:

Page 15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

a. the local knowledge that would identify the infrastructure needed to
support and further encourage growth in that particular economic zone;
b. jointly improve the way existing infrastructure is managed; and
c. provide an agreed pipeline of targeted investment to deliver
infrastructure where and when it was needed.
Information Communication Technology Infrastructure:
The NBN has not brought high speed internet access to all parts of Australia. It has
been rolled out, yet fails to deliver on its promise, it cannot support growth or quality
of life in Cessnock LGA as it has been delivered, and even under proposed further
rollout.
Regional centres in Australia including Cessnock LGA has many homes and
businesses in existing service areas told they must wait for a position to open up on
their exchange to access broadband. The demand is so high for these services, that
customers are repeatedly turned away by providers. Some areas in Newcastle
complain of having their copper wire removed in place of new fibre to the node, as
this wasn’t world class technology. In Cessnock LGA, many homes and businesses
would be grateful to have had the opportunity to have copper wire and an
exchange with the correct number of nodes!
Further, entire new housing estates are shirked by internet providers, having to wait
up to 3 years for an internet connection to their homes because their area is already
on the proposed NBN rollout (despite repeat pushbacks of implementation). These
areas support growing populations and can absorb more growth. They have
attracted investment by business owners who cannot work from home in this
changing economy. Families are missing out on vital online connections which
reinforce their engagement within their communities - to their local school,
community groups, education and social networks.
The cost of accessing broadband in regional Australia is already higher than that in
metropolitan centres. Mobile networks conflict with each other, and fail in peak
periods. Wine Country businesses report not being able to take eftpos transactions
during high volume concerts and events due to the number of visitors accessing
social networks putting strain on existing mobile internet. Satellite and mobile based
internet solutions are not only extremely cost prohibitive, they are ineffective and not
competitive with speeds offered by fixed broadband elsewhere. Even ADSL
performs better in some areas of Cessnock LGA.

Solution: High speed broadband ‘Bridges’:

Page 16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Where the NBN failed to leverage private investment, a possible solution to regional
Australia’s connection dilemma can be in installing effective technology to beam
signals.
Wireless bridges have been shown to be extremely cost effective and are routinely
utilised in rural, outback and regional Australia allow internet signals to be beamed
for up to 50 kilometres. The wireless bridges need line of sight for fast speeds.
The high profile case of Mr Saffioti who installed a wireless bridge, beams NBN about
12 kilometres from Kiama to Oak Flats, and then another three to Haywards Bay. The
link has been reported to run efficiently, with regular download speeds of about
70mbps down and 35 up. Total cost of the project: about $10008.
Regional WA companies have reported using wireless bridges to beam internet
services to remote locations where it is not feasible to run fibre.
This type of solution is something which Cessnock LGA businesses and residents might
happily pay as a cost sharing initiative to bring high speed internet services to areas
unable to be serviced. It could be beamed from an exchange with availability to a
receiver in unserviceable areas, and then run through the existing fibre which runs
into “NBN ready” businesses and houses unable to make a connection.
Opportunities exist to negotiate with telecommunication providers to firstly approve
the use of wireless bridges, as the creative sharing of a connection would currently
be in breach of service agreement. There is also room to negotiate the costs of the
ongoing service under geographic clusters and share in the installation cost.
Education, Training and Skills
Businesses are experiencing workforce issues as a result of a number of factors, one
major one being the decline of traditional industries and in the resource sector
economy in the Region. Workers have been displaced from prominent employers
within the region, with closures and contractions of local mines, as well as closures of
significant employers such as Hydro Aluminium smelter.
The fastest growing and most prominent industry within the Cessnock LGA is currently
the tourism sector. The transition into other industries, particularly from blue collar jobs
to service roles can be a challenging and incongruent process. Generational
challenges associated with disadvantage and lack of foundation skills can mean
some unemployed are harder to place in available jobs. The aim is for a workforce
that is sustainable for the region in the short term in relation to the resource sector’s
growth and, in the longer term, for a sustainable workforce for a thriving region.

8

https://www.lifehacker.com.au/2017/01/no-nbn-in-your-street-just-set-up-a-wireless-bridge/

Page 17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

The lack of foundation employability skills amongst unemployed locals in the Hunter
Region often means that they cannot compete for local jobs, particularly in
hospitality opportunities presented in Hunter Valley wine regions. The literature and
research trends indicate that a general upskilling in soft skills is required across the
board resulting in:
•
Transferable skills
•
Basic skills (numeracy/ literacy)
•
Soft skills and customer service
•
Leadership and business skills
•
Strong socialisation and communication skills
•
Strategic skills
•
Work ethic
•
‘Life experience’ skills
The Department of Employment’s Skills Shortage Research provides that many
unsuccessful applicants lacked communication skills. Another survey of Employers’
Recruitment Experiences found a range of employability skills and personality traits
are viewed by employers as essential. Employability skills commonly considered
essential included:
• Interpersonal Skills
• Basic Computer Skills
• Customer Skills
• Communication
• Personality Traits commonly considered essential included:
• Attitude and adaptability
• Reliability
• Presentation
• Work ethic
Studies have shown classroom training has mixed outcomes and successful training
for employment prospects, occurs with a compounding effect over time. Currently
skills training and general education may offer one off opportunities to learn such
soft or transferable skill sets which is not supportive of long term successful
employment outcomes. There needs to be an emphasis on building a labour force
with ‘transferable skills’ – that is, skills that can adapt to changes within the industry of
employment as well as across diverse industries As a general, traditional industries
are moving away from needing low skilled workers to workers with higher technical,
design, IT and marketing skills. Research supports that access to productive and
rewarding jobs improves as the level of education increases.
Within Cessnock LGA there is high demand for skill level 1 and 2 employees (degree
or advanced diploma), but very low supply. Conversely, there is very high supply of
low skilled workers, and low demand. What this means is that the level of
competition for low skilled jobs is very high, with employers having a high degree of
choice of candidates. Candidates from a lower socio-economic background, who
may lack some of the foundation skills, therefore find it very difficult to secure work. If
you happen to be a candidate in skill level 1 or 2, the opposite is true, and you will

Page 18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

potentially have the choice on what position you will take, dependant on the salary
and benefits offered to you by employers.
Therefore, there are varying means to increase the skills levels within a regional
centre such as the Cessnock LGA through:
1. Implementing connections to all national and international tertiary and
education facilities via broadband connectivity and access in regional areas
that is enjoyed in major centres. In today’s technological environment
capability there is no requirement for physical infrastructure to provide
education and skills training to any regional centre;
2. Any practical skills training for example trades, requires access to efficient
and reliable public transport;
3. Attraction and provision of skilled workers and job opportunities from
relocated decentralised Commonwealth entities, functions and corporates.

IN CONCLUSION
The Cessnock LGA is typical of a regional city in that it suffers from shortages of
infrastructure and weaker education and skills attainment. The LGA suffers poor
health indicators, high unemployment and socio economic conditions brought
about from long term mining legacies.
However, as shown above the population of the Cessnock LGA is increasing
dramatically compared to other regions across NSW.
As a regional city, Cessnock LGA has the ability and the means to be a leading
growth area that can:









Provide affordable land for growing business demand;
Provide affordable land for residential demand;
Provide critical land for future food security needs;
Take pressure from metropolitan areas of population, urban sprawl and
congestion;
Provide greater economic output;
Provide time savings efficiencies;
Provide jobs, career paths; and
Provide lifestyle benefits.

It is well noted by all governments that regional areas can thrive where there is
economic diversification beyond the traditional areas of agriculture and mining.
However, this prescribes that a strong commitment and strategic preference is
required from both Federal and State governments to effectively realise economic
diversity in regional areas.
Page 19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Cessnock LGA has the propensity to absorb population and economic growth, has
greater range of strategically located hubs such as Cessnock and Kurri Kurri. In
addition, they offer the ability to make smarter use of existing infrastructure such as
the $1.7 BILLION Hunter Expressway to generate more diverse economic outcomes.

FIGURE 1: REGIONAL CONTEXT AND RELATIONSHIPS WITH CESSNOCK

Council is of the opinion that due to the strategic position of the HEX, that this critical
transport link can definitely be leveraged to provide greater return on investment,
that would provide linkages between the North (Brisbane through to northern NSW),
South to Sydney (153 km) and Central Coast (78 km), East to Newcastle (45 km) and
to the Western regions of NSW.
This would support the strategic imperatives of both the Federal and State
government to make smarter use of existing infrastructure to drive productivity.
Urban Release Areas proposed to be released within the Cessnock LGA equal
17,118 lots, providing a diverse and affordable range of housing should a workforce
be seeking to locate in the Cessnock LGA.
Cessnock is identified as a Major Centre in the Lower Hunter Regional Strategy and
looks set to reinforce that role in the Hunter Regional Plan 2016.
Cessnock LGA is located very strategically to ports, airports, skilled labour, road
networks and Sydney.
Page 20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 76

Only a rigorous program that actively seeks to support regional cities through
creating opportunities for business relocation will be effective in achieving economic
potential in regional areas and reducing the inequity between cities and regions.
Government can encourage regional centre growth that, once established initially,
can form its own momentum and continue building on the local economy.
Council is strongly of the opinion that should Cessnock LGA receive appropriate and
relevant funding, this decision would positively influence productivity outcomes that
will improve the economic wellbeing and prosperity of the LGA and contribute
significantly to the State and National productivity objectives.
The many benefits, achieved would provide significant Return on Investment and
would accelerate economic development and economic diversity.
Regionally, the inequity between cities and regions mean we are at risk of losing
competitive advantage without considering an integrated approach to strategic
decisions for building regional economic resilience and productivity measures that is
bold, sustainable long term and that catalyses further future growth.
Our Cities, Our Future9, the national urban policy for a productive sustainable and
liveable future, outlines that an integrated approach must be taken by the
Australian Government, State, Territory and local governments, business and the
community to plan and manage communities to deliver prosperity. This policy
discusses how urban and regional areas can reap increased productivity where
knowledge, businesses and markets are connected and how economic and human
capital are utilised. There is clear Australian Government Policy support for achieving
maximum amenity and liveability within communities to attract visitors and residents
in regional areas. Unfortunately, this is not backed with equitable funding to those
residents in cities, to those residents in regions.
Focus on regional growth areas and strengths to create employment is critical, but
requires an understanding of the relationships between local needs, regional
capacity and their importance to the nation as a whole.

Department of Infrastructure and Transport. Commonwealth of Australia 2011.
Accessed
9

https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/infrastructure/pab/files/Our_Cities_National_Urban_Policy_
Paper_2011.pdf

Page 21

