Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

4 May 2018

Senate Standing Committee on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
economics.sen@aph.gov.au

Re: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of, regional inequality in Australia
Thank you for the opportunity to make a submission to the Senate Economics Committee
inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
Country Australians make a significant contributor to the Australian economy. However, the
7 million people living in these areas often have more difficulty in accessing health services
than their urban counterparts, contributing to a lower life expectancy and worse outcomes
on leading indicators of health.
This submission focuses on the delivery of health care in regional and rural Australia,
particularly highlighting the need to tackle the mal-distribution of the medical workforce.
The AMA has been at the forefront in campaigning for increased Government support to
improve access to health care in country communities and address regional health
inequality.
The AMA welcomes the Senate Economics Committee’s consideration of this submission
and would welcome the opportunity to appear before the Committee to answer any
questions that members might have.
Yours sincerely,

Dr Michael Gannon
President

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

AMA submission – Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of, regional
inequality in Australia
Health is an important indicator of the inequality experienced by Australians living in regional
locations and has an undeniable impact on quality of life. Most Australians live in major cities
(71 percent), while approximately 18 percent live in inner regional areas, 9 percent in outer
regional areas, and 2.4 percent in both remote and very remote areas.1 Life expectancy is one
to two years lower for people in regional Australia compared with major cities, and in remote
areas it is up to seven years lower. Death rates in regional, rural, and remote areas (referred
to as ‘regional’ in this document unless otherwise specified) are higher than in major cities,
and the rates increase in line with degrees of remoteness.
The AMA has been actively advocating for increased funding and strategies to deal with
regional health inequity.
Regional Australians are a population group with inadequate access to basic health services
and consequently suffer higher rates of preventable disease or illness. Prevention and early
intervention are acknowledged as critical to maintaining a healthy population. Unfortunately,
the challenge of access for populations in regional communities means that they suffer a
higher number of potentially preventable hospitalisations than their counterparts in major
cities.2
Table 1 is a simple illustration of the current problem with workforce distribution. The number
of medical practitioners, particularly specialists, steadily decreases with increasing rurality.
While the number of full time workload equivalent doctors per 100,000 population in major
cities is 437, there were 272 in outer regional areas, and only 264 in very remote areas.

Table 1: Full-time equivalent medical practitioners per 100,000 population
Remoteness Area:

Medical Practitioners

Major city

437

Inner regional

292

Outer regional

272

Very remote

264

Table is replicated from Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2016. Australia’s Health 2016. Australia’s health series no. 15.
Cat. No. AUS 199. Canberra: AIHW.

1
2

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Australia’s Welfare 2017, AIHW, Canberra.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2016, Australia’s Health 2016, AIHW Canberra.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

For regional Australians’ to see improvement health outcomes, all levels of government will
need to co-operate in developing policy to better address the demands of delivering health
care in non-urban environments. As such, the AMA have identified the following submission
terms of reference to be of importance in addressing regional inequality related to health:
(a) fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
(b) improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies,
(c) regional development policies,
(d) infrastructure,
(e) education,
(g) enhancing local workforce skills, and
(i) decentralisation policies.
Measures of inequality
ABS Statistics demonstrate that higher morbidity and mortality rates span across multiple
classes of injury and illness for regional Australians.3 They are also more likely to have lower
life expectancy and higher rates of disease and injury than those in major cities.4 Indicators
of inequality in regional health care include:


Access

Table 1 shows the current extent of the mal-distribution of the medical workforce and with
76% of graduating domestic medical students reportedly living in capital cities, 5 there is
clearly the potential for this problem to worsen. Limited access to doctors is a large
contributor to poorer health outcomes as those with less access to health care can be
expected to engage less with prevention and early intervention, often seeking treatment
when their condition has become more advanced and more difficult or costly to treat.
Access to high quality general practice services should be ensured for rural people in all
communities where is sustainable and increased effort is required to support more locally
trained doctors with full Fellowship to work in rural and remote communities – reducing our
reliance on international medical graduates. Telehealth should be utilised to provide GP
services to communities too small to support even a branch general practice.

3

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2015, 4364.0.55.001 National Health Survey: First Results, 2014-15,
viewed 26 March 2018, https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/web/193/rural-remote-health/contents/healthconditions-remoteness
4
Australia’s Health 2016.
5
Medical Schools Outcomes Database National Data Report 2015, http://www.medicaldeans.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/Medical-Students-Workforce-Survey-Report-FINAL-14102015.pdf.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77



Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health care

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, who represent 16 percent of remote and 45 percent of
very remote populations,6 are understood to have an average life expectancy between 10 and
15 years lower than non-indigenous Australians.7 They have traditionally recorded worse
morbidity, mortality and infant mortality rates since data collection became a priority. There
is a significant interrelationship between regional communities and Indigenous Australians:
21 percent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people live in remote communities as
opposed to the 2 percent of non-indigenous total population.8 Discrimination is also a
problem as an estimated 26,500 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults ‘reported
avoiding seeking health care because they had been treated unfairly at hospitals or doctor
surgeries.’9 This distrust in the health care system needs to be addressed if Australia is ever
to see a positive response to reduce the inequality experienced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.


Mental Health

The mal-distribution of psychiatrists, psychologists and other mental health service providers
has led to critical workforce shortages in regional areas which must be addressed. Some
regional populations have no access to a mental health professional, and compared with a
17% prevalence rate for mental health problems in major cities, inner regional and outer
regional/remote areas has a 19% prevalence rate.10


Technology

In 2015, 80 percent of non-urban Australians had an internet connection at home compared
with 89 percent of those in capital cities.11 Internet use via mobile phone was much lower in
non-urban areas, at 37 percent, compared to 60 percent for capital cities. This reflects the
patchy, unreliable or absent mobile coverage in many rural and remote areas. While mobile
broadband use was highest in non-urban areas, at 29 percent, compared to 25 percent in

6

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2015, Australia’s Welfare 2015, AIHW, Canberra.
Holland, C 2016, Close the Gap: Progress and priorities report, Bright Print Group, Sydney.
8
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2015, The health and welfare of Australia’s Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples: 2015, AIHW Canberra.
9
Ibid.
10
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2017, ‘Rural & Remote Health: Web Report’, Australian
Government, viewed 12 April 2018, https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/web/193/rural-remotehealth/contents/health-conditions-remoteness.
11
Australian Communications and Media Authority (2016), Regional Australians Online,
https://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/engage-blogs/engage-blogs/Research-snapshots/Regional-Australiansonline.
7

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

capital cities, mobile broadband is currently not a good solution for business or eHealth, due
to the relatively small amounts of data on the relatively costly plans.


Workforce Pressures

Doctors who do choose to practice medicine regionally are faced with difficulties in working
outside metropolitan hubs. They work longer hours,12 have limited access to locum services
and limited opportunities to up skill professionally in comparison to their city colleagues.
The strategies employed to address regional health inequities
Successive Federal Governments have recognised the need for intervention and co-ordinated
strategies aiming to reduce the inequality of health care in regional areas. One of the ways
Governments have attempted to alleviate health care disparities between major cities and
regional areas is by introducing a range of initiatives to attract and retain doctors in regional
areas. The following strategies have been undertaken:









an expansion of medical training places;
improving the rural classification system guiding the allocation of workforce incentives
with the introduction of the Modified Monash Model;
reform of the GP Rural Incentives Program;
the establishment of Rural Clinical Schools;
introducing the Rural Junior Doctor Training Innovation Fund (RJDIF);
introducing Rural GP Infrastructure Grants (RGPIG)
establishing the office of and appointing a National Rural Health Commissioner; and
other initiatives targeting doctors to work in communities with under-serviced health
needs.

AMA recommendations
Regional Australians deserve a better structured health policy to address the inequalities they
currently face. A particular area that needs addressing in order to improve regional inequality
in health care is access – in particular addressing the current mal-distribution of the
workforce. With that in mind, the AMA has identified five key priority areas that would help
build the rural medical workforce and in turn improve regional health care:
1. encourage students from rural areas to enroll in medical school and provide medical
students with opportunities for positive and continuing exposure to regional/rural
medical training;
12

Rural Health Workforce Australia National Minimum Data Set (MDS), Reports 2012, 2013 and 2014,
http://www.rhwa.org.au/fact-sheets--research---workforce-data.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

2. provide a dedicated and quality training pathway with the right skill mix to ensure
doctors are adequately trained to work in rural areas;
3. provide a rewarding and sustainable work environment with adequate facilities,
professional support and education, personal comfort, and flexible work
arrangements, including locum relief;
4. provide family support that includes spousal opportunities/employment, educational
opportunities for children’s education, subsidy for housing/relocation and/or tax
relief; and
5. provide financial incentives including rural loadings to ensure competitive
remuneration.
Specific areas to address include:
Education and Training
Evidence suggests that students from rural backgrounds and/or those who train in a rural
area are more likely to practise in a rural area.13 Rural Clinical Schools, enrolment targets for
students with a rural background, and requirements for students to spend extended periods
in rural clinical settings are effective policy measures that should be built on. The AMA has
developed a number of policy proposals regarding education and training that have the
potential to improve the sustainability and distribution of the medical workforce. These
include:






lifting the targeted intake of medical students from a rural background from 25
percent of all new enrolments to one-third of all new enrolments;
lifting the proportion of medical students required to undertake at least one year of
clinical training in a rural area from 25 percent to one-third;
moving beyond the more limited RJDTIF and establishing a Community Residency
Program to provide doctors in training with prevocational general practice placements
in rural areas. These placements would support efforts to deliver more training and
care in the community, supplement the traditional hospital-based approach to
medical training, and promote ‘generalist’ careers. They give doctors in training a
valuable insight into life as a rural GP, and encourage a long-term career in rural
general practice;
expanding the Specialist Training Program to 1,400 places per annum (from 1,000 in
2018), with a strong emphasis on rural placements;

13

McGrail, Matthew R., Russell, Deborah J., and Campbell, David G., ‘Vocational training of general
practitioners in rural locations is critical for the Australian rural medical workforce’, The Medical Journal of
Australia, 205 (5), 216-222, https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2016/205/5/vocational-training-generalpractitioners-rural-locations-critical-australian.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77





further developing the concept of regional training networks (RTNs) to bolster rural
training opportunities, and to provide a valuable and meaningful career pathway for
doctors in training who want to work in rural Australia. It would also improve patient
access to medical care. The AMA has advocated for this policy and in April 2017, the
Federal Government announced 26 regional training hubs would be built into the
Rural Health Multidisciplinary Training (RHMT) program at existing RHMT program
training sites; and
providing adequate accommodation and access to services, including the internet, for
doctors undertaking training in rural and remote locations.

Further reading:
AMA Vision Statement for General Practice Training 2016
National Code of Practice - Flexible Work and Training Practices
Rural Generalism
In regional areas GPs are often required to provide a wider scope of practice than in
metropolitan areas. Although generalist numbers have been declining, a number of
jurisdictions have established strong rural generalist training pathways, particularly
Queensland, which are helping to boost the number of doctors with the range of skills needed
to meet the health needs of country Australians. State/Territory health departments should
enhance the scope of practice of rural hospitals where possible and support the credentialing
of rural generalists to provide those services.
The AMA supports the expansion of the rural generalist model and will continue to work with
the National Rural Health Commissioner in order to advance the National Rural Generalist
Pathways (NRGP). The AMA formed part of the technical working group organised by the
Rural Doctors Association of Australia (RDAA) which developed a policy document listing a set
of agreed core principles that could be used as a basis for a national rollout of an advanced
training program for GPs. The principles agreed upon include:









Meeting the workforce and clinical needs of rural and remote Australia;
Early entry and ongoing support;
Curricula training and assessment;
Qualifications;
Management and organisational oversight;
Impact on established programs;
Availability of advanced training positions; and
Recognition.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

For details of the principles:
Meeting the health needs of rural and remote Australia through an integrated strategic
framework – an Advanced Rural Training Program
Further reading:
AMA Position Statement - Fostering Generalism in the Medical Workforce 2012
Employment of generalist medical practitioners 2017
Work Environment: Infrastructure and Facilities
The Commonwealth and State/Territory Governments must work together to ensure that
regional hospitals are adequately funded to meet the needs of their local communities. They
need modern facilities, and must be able to attract a sustainable health workforce. Our
regional hospitals must provide an environment that is conducive to delivering:






quality patient care;
a strong and relevant training experience for doctors in training;
support for the development and maintenance of procedural skills;
opportunities for professional development; and
safe working hours.

The AMA believes that Council of Australian Government (COAG) discussions about the
reform of health care must consider a dedicated funding stream for regional hospitals, backed
by a national benchmark and performance framework, to ensure that State/Territory
Governments maintain the level of services that are promised to local communities.
Further reading:
AMA Position Statement: Workplace Facilities and Accommodation for Hospital Doctors 2006
AMA Position Statement: Safe work environments - 2015
The AMA also recommends that the Government continue to fund rural GP infrastructure
grants. Previous rounds of infrastructure grant funding have delivered results for rural
communities,14 with local practices taking realistic steps to improve patient access to services
and support teaching activities. The Australian National Audit Office reports that
infrastructure funding grants are effective and a good value-for-money investment.

14

ANAO Audit Report No.44 2011-12, ‘Administration of the Primary Care Infrastructure Grants Program’,
Commonwealth of Australia 2012,
https://www.anao.gov.au/sites/g/files/net3416/f/201112%20Audit%20Report%20No%2044.pdf.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

For more see the AMA Plan for better health care for regional rural and remote Australia
2016.
The role of the internet and telehealth
The NBN is a necessary and worthy investment that will enhance economic and social benefits
in regional areas that will lead to future savings for the Government, particularly in regards
to health care. Therefore, it is necessary that requisite investment is made to ensure the
development of medical and communication technology has the potential to deliver these
benefits. The AMA has made submissions and appeared before Parliamentary Committee
inquiries into NBN to stress the importance of fast, reliable and affordable NBN for regional
Australia. The health sector needs telecommunications connectivity for health service
delivery and management, including high resolution image transfer, doing business with
Government and complying with Government requirements, continuing professional
development and videoconferencing, online education, clinical decisions and other support.
Doctors living in regional locations rely on access to the internet for private use to maintain
support networks, complete personal administration and more.
To effectively leverage telecommunications technology to deliver better health outcomes at
lower cost in regional areas and to implement new models of health care, both mobile and
broadband technology must be ubiquitous, reliable, affordable, and supply adequate
capacity. However, the use of telehealth and telemedicine in regional Australia remains
patchy and is not used to full potential because of no, or inadequate, internet access. As
mainstream health care provision becomes increasingly technology based and requires more
and faster broadband services to operate, there is a real risk that regional areas will be left
further and further behind in their ability to provide quality health services. In this regard, the
AMA has previously called for the Commonwealth to:








Extend the boundaries of the NBN’s fibre cable and fixed wireless footprints, and
mobile coverage, wherever possible;
Begin an incremental process of expanding the terrestrial network to address
increased usage in the future;
Develop measures to prioritise or optimise the broadband capacity available by
satellite for hospitals and medical practices, either by exempting or allocating higher
data allowance quotas, or by providing a separate data allowance;
Create universal, unmetered online access to Government, hospital and health
services for people in rural and remote areas;
Establish an innovation budget for development of local infrastructure solutions for
rural and remote areas; and
Engage with State, Territory, and local government and related stakeholders to coinvest or coordinate planning to achieve the optimum overall infrastructure outcome
for their area. This could involve public private partnerships or the leveraging of
philanthropic infrastructure funding through, for example, tax concessions.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

Further reading: AMA Position Statement - Better Access to High Speed Broadband for Rural
and Remote Health Care 2016
Support for Doctors
For doctors in regional locations, particularly those that have relocated, arrangements need
to ensure that they can access quality accommodation, understand the availability of local
services and how to access them, and access support for their general wellbeing.
Isolation can also be a problem for regional doctors. The toll on an individual’s mental health
can be acute, not only regarding isolation from social networks but also professional
networks. When doctors relocate to a regional location they can find it difficult to maintain a
robust and supportive network of colleagues. There needs to be support from organisations,
particularly Colleges, for those locations where regional doctors train, and Rural Workforce
Agencies to ensure networks are built and maintained.
The decision for a doctor to relocate or practise on a medium to long-term basis in regional
areas also has a significant impact on their family. Where a partner works or children are at
school there may be considerable cost and loss of amenity from a decision to move to regional
practice. Simply paying a medical practitioner more, while helpful, does not address the full
dimensions of the problem and ignores significant factors in any individual's decision-making
process when considering regional practice. There should be adequate compensation,
support and access to re-training if required, so that a partner can remain employed in an
acceptable occupation if their partner moves to a regional area. Job seeking assistance should
also be offered if required. If a family requires assistance to maintain a child in school in a
larger town or city centre, there needs to be school fee assistance, given the possible
requirement for boarding and other increased services or tuition.
The Government should continue to provide funding grants to allow local governments in
regional areas to purchase facilities to support medical practitioners such as
housing/practices/equipment, so that practitioners can operate a practice on a walk-in walkout basis. The costs of establishing a practice have been nominated as one of the major
disincentives to doctors who might otherwise relocate to workforce shortage areas.
Further reading: AMA Position Statement - Easy Entry, Gracious Exit Model for Provision of
Medical Services in Small Rural and Remote Towns 2014
Indigenous Health Professionals
There is a strong link between the health of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in regional
communities and their access to culturally appropriate health services.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

The AMA believes that:






greater effort should be made to encourage Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders to
undertake medical or health professional training, and incentives provided to
encourage Indigenous and non-Indigenous doctors and medical trainees to work in
rural and remote Indigenous communities;
Aboriginal Medical Services should be resourced to offer mentoring and training
opportunities in regional Indigenous communities to Indigenous and non-Indigenous
medical students and vocational trainees; and
training modules, resource material and ongoing advice should be developed for, and
delivered to, all medical schools and rural and remote medical practices on Indigenous
health issues, Indigenous-specific health initiatives and culturally appropriate service
delivery.

Locum Services
Locum services are a key element to addressing the problems of high workload for regional
practice. Lack of time off for professional development, family responsibilities and recreation
can be among the most negative aspects of life as a regional doctor. The Commonwealth
Government should continue to support local programs, including those coordinated by the
rural workforce agencies and medical colleges, and where appropriate provide increased
support based on the needs of particular communities.
International Medical Graduates
The AMA recognises the substantial contribution that International Medical Graduates (IMGs)
make to the medical workforce and the delivery of health care in Australia, particularly in
providing patients with access to care in regional communities. Australia has a strong reliance
on IMGs, which make up over 40 percent of the medical workforce in rural and remote areas.
It is in the interests of the profession and the public that appropriate, clearly defined and
transparent standards are in place to govern the assessment, recruitment and training of
IMGs, and that every effort should be made to support IMGs to enhance their long-term
contribution to the medical workforce. Though they do an excellent job, Australia cannot
continue to rely on them indefinitely to fill workforce gaps.
Further reading: AMA Position Statement - International Medical Graduates 2015
Nurses and multidisciplinary team care
Multidisciplinary team care involves professionals from a range of disciplines, such as
dieticians, physiotherapists and non-dispensing pharmacists in general practice, working as a

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77

GP led team to deliver comprehensive care that addresses as many of the patient’s needs as
possible. General practice nurses and other members of a multidisciplinary health care team
make a valuable contribution to the delivery of primary health care services in regional areas.
The AMA believes funding arrangements must reflect and support the full range of work
undertaken by practice nurses for and on behalf of GPs in regional areas. Specific loadings for
the cost of employing practice nurses in regional areas should continue. While the AMA does
not support a role for independent nurse practitioners, this does not preclude the capacity
for highly skilled nurses, working as part of a collaborative primary care team led by one or
more GPs to be supported in the delivery of services to remote areas where access to health
care is often very difficult. These nurses should:



have appropriate clinical experience and training; and
be supported through the provision of appropriate communication technologies to
ensure that treatment can be properly co-ordinated with the supervising GP(s).

Financial Incentives
The AMA and the RDAA have developed a package of measures that recognises both the
isolation of regional practice and the need for the right skill mix in these areas. Building a
sustainable future for rural practice: the rural rescue package, proposes two tiers of
incentives:
 a rural isolation payment available to all rural doctors including GPs, locums, other
specialists, salaried doctors and registrars, with the level of support provided
increasing with rurality; and
 a rural procedural and emergency/on-call loading, aimed at boosting the number of
doctors in rural areas with essential advanced skills in a range of areas such as
obstetrics, surgical, anaesthetic, acute mental health, or emergency skills. Other areas
of skills need may be added as required, for example palliative care, paediatrics, or
Indigenous health, to ensure that community needs are met.
Further reading: Building a sustainable future for rural practice: the AMA/RDAA Rural Rescue
Package 2016
Funding for Outreach Programs
Outreach programs to provide funding assistance for specialists visiting regional areas are a
valuable means to enhance the delivery of services in these areas. These programs should be
adequately funded and based upon the following principles:


services must be directed to communities where an unmet need is established by the
local medical practitioners;

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 77






services must be designed to fit in with local health care services, and wherever
possible they should include up-skilling and other measures to enhance the
sustainability of local medical services;
funding must be available to existing outreach services; and
there should be strong medical college involvement in outreach programs in order to
encourage greater participation and services should not be withdrawn without
consultation with local practitioners and the local community.

Conclusion
Poor access to health care is a strong driver of regional inequality, with country Australian’s
deserving a better deal. Existing regional medical workforce policy is fragmented and in need
of a significant overhaul, with strong co-operation among different levels of Government
required. Policy needs to focus on areas such as the development of infrastructure, education
and training, practice support and economic incentives. If these areas can be better
addressed, then we will see more local graduates taking up a career in these areas and
improved health services for patients in these communities which will reduce geographic
health discrimination.

Acknowledgement: This submission was prepared on behalf of the AMA by Sian Pickard,
Kailee Strang & Sinead M’Gee from the University of Newcastle as part
of their Bachelor of Communication Program course requirements.

AMA: Inquiry into the indicators of, and the impact of regional in equality in Australia

13

