Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 78

Cloncurry Shire Council
38-46 Daintree Street
PO Box 3
Cloncurry QLD 4824
ABN: 76 581 540 914

Telephone: (07) 4742 4100
Facsimile: (07) 4742 1712
Email: council@cloncurry.qld.gov.au
Website: www.cloncurry.qld.gov.au
Cloncurry Shire Council
Submission to Parliament of Australia

The Indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

From: Cloncurry Shire Council:
Principal Contact: Mayor Greg Campbell
Email Address: council@cloncurry.qld.gov.au
Mailing Address: PO Box 3, Cloncurry QLD 4824

Summary
The vast North West is the home of some of the largest privately owned pastoral properties in
Australia and the heart of the rich, vast North West Mineral Province. Our region is a major economic
contributor to our Nation, yet we are not recipients of equal representation, access or equity.
We ask for parity in services and even provision of services.
Discussion
We reside in the vast North West of Queensland. We are less than one percent of the population, but
we contribute greatly to the economy of Australia. We represent some of the largest privately owned,
world innovative pastoral companies in Australia. Located in the middle of the massive North West
Mineral Province, we have global leading and local mining operations who export copper, iron ore,
gold and rare earth minerals, and more, across the globe.
We are a major transport hub, on the crossroads of the outback taking our produce to the country and
the world. We deliver approx. $310M in royalties per annum. Our industries provide employment for
thousands. Yet we suffer gross regional inequality. Access is constantly affected by poor transport
options. We pay some of the country’s highest airfares and our Bus and Rail transport options have
been depleted via slow attrition. Our representation is affected by vast electorates, poor transport and
access to information.
We are forced to prop up exorbitant airfares via a massive FIFO workforce. Yet their usage and
depletion of our infrastructure and other services, is not considered in funding and other options to the
regions.
We have a massive health system that utilises FIFO specialists and other services. Our major health
services are located in Townsville, patient transfer and patient travel, utilise air travel for patient
transport and pay high fares for services.
Regional inequality exists. It exists in our Schools, health services, our transport infrastructure.
Yet despite this, or because of our defined remote isolation, our region has between 40% to 50%
higher building, housing and construction costs than the coast. This means that despite representing
less than 1% per capita resident population, our development is higher, our prospects are increasing,
and our regional securities are being developed by local Council and businesses.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 78

Ever dwindling populations are in part created due to lack of opportunity. Opportunity is made
tangible by vision and considered development. Opportunities for development in remote Australia are
restricted and sometimes prevented by unequal parameters that fail to consider community, access to
services, quality vs quantity and so many other factors that evidence sound business development. Yet
loans and insurances for business and other development are still levied and considered on postcodes,
this means banks have refused equity to small business development proposals based on a remote
postcode.
Youth
In accordance to findings from the Queensland Government Statisticians Office report on Regional
Youth Unemployment for March 2018, Outback Queensland had the largest percentage point increase
of youth unemployment within the State, with all 19 Statistical Area Level 4 in Outback QLD (SA4’s)
reporting an increase in youth unemployment as per figure 1 below.

Source: (Queensland Government Statisticians Office, Regional youth unemployment, March 2018,
modified 26 April 2018)

The retention of youth and young professionals in regional areas is a challenge as many children from
rural areas must relocate to larger centres for high school or tertiary education, and often once they
move to the large centres, the job security, lifestyle and services available are far superior to the
opportunities available in rural areas. This ultimately contributes to population decline in rural areas,
creating a large gap in rural community’s population composition and less young people calling
regional Australia home.
Vital Infrastructure Funding Support
Constantly depleted services and funding support from both State and Federal agencies and
Governance, has seen rural isolated communities develop funding support from local companies.
Whilst this is beneficial and presents great tangible opportunity to the regions, is has allowed varying
governments to factor this unique support into funding allocations and considerations. However this
hybrid funding was first instigated because of the lack of State and Federal prioritisation for such
things as roads and other infrastructure versus the urgent need for our industries to transport our
primary industries produce and mining operations. Roads were constructed via collaborative
arrangements between local governance and private entities to construct the vital and required,
infrastructure for industries that provide tens of thousands of jobs and other benefit, to both the regions
and the national economy.
Financial Assistance Grants (FAGS)
FAG’s grants are a key source of revenue for communities across Australia, used to maintain local
roads, bridges, community halls, libraries, swimming pools and services for the elderly. With FAG’s
Grants indexation reinstated following 4 years of being frozen, the CPI increased over this period and

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 78

must be factored in to ensure the indexation grant allocation amount aligns with current population
and CPI.
Indigenous Population
The Indigenous population in rural and regional areas are considerably higher. In accordance to 2011
Census data two-thirds of the nation’s total Indigenous population reside in regional or remote
Australia. (Source: ABS, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Population, 2016 Census Data,
modified 27 March 2018) With this, levels of unemployment increase as well as increased levels of
family and domestic violence, health issues as well as limited access to education and employment
opportunities. Issues faced by this demographic must be factored in when consideration for
infrastructure and services in rural areas.
Development of Northern Australia – White paper
The Federal Government has expressed its desire to see the development of Northern Australia
evidenced through its White Paper Report on ‘Developing Northern Australia’, however we are yet to
see tangible results as outlined in key objectives of this paper:
• making it easier to use natural assets, in close consultation with, and the support of, Indigenous
communities
• providing a more welcoming investment environment
• investing in infrastructure to lower business and household costs
• reducing barriers to employing people
• improving governance
To often the advancement and progression of these key objectives and developments are held up in the
political process, with minimal outcomes for the north.
GDP Figures
It is important to highlight the significant economic contribution regional areas provide to the national
economy through agriculture and resource mining. Regional inequality is most apparent as the level of
returns to these rural areas is very disproportionate to what is generated from them. In Cloncurry Shire
alone, over the last ten years approximately $1.5 Billion in royalties has been generated, with only an
estimated $36 Million returned in Grants over the same period. (Source: QLD Resource Council,
2018).
FIFO Health Services and Patient Travel: The cost of importing services
Whilst we do not have aces to the full budget, economic analysis of the costs incurred for Specialist
services and patient travel could evidence strong consideration towards re-establishing satellite health
services who have the ability to perform the more routine and common tests. Some of these services
were available in more isolated communities but their closure was made certain through rationalisation
and brutal cutbacks. The return of these basic services to isolated communities would provide local
employment, more direct and immediate delivery of services and a reckoned budget saving.
Varying Government entities utilise a form of FIFO to enable the delivery of services to isolated
communities. The gradual closure of many government offices and reduction of staff numbers across
remote Australia has resulted in delivery of government entity services in remote Australia that rely on
commercial flight carriers and FIFO employees. Decentralisation and the re-establishment of satellite
government entity offices and staff numbers would have great impact on small communities and
across departmental budget costs.
Decentralisation of some Health, Education, Agriculture, Natural resources services would prove to be
cost effective and deliver a more centralised benefit to local communities. There are no DPI or CSIRO
research stations left in the West. There used to be.
Decentralisation
Decentralisation as a policy needs to be practically applied. Too many government services have been
taken away from remote communities. This has resulted in population decline and economic
variances. Each service and employee, provides economic benefit and security to the remote

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 78

community to which it services. It goes partway to reducing the stigma of social isolation and reducing
equity in access to information and services.
Lack of viable transport options between remote communities often sees the delivery of services
provided in major centres that can be nearly 1000klm distance from family and other support services.
Wellness and Social Capital
Support for decentralisation and tax reform could see more population security in remote towns. It also
allows for the gradual import of new skills and opportunities for the communities.
We have great opportunity and social inclusion. Our communities are supportive and support each
group and event. Yet with the loss of local opportunity, employment and economic investment our
communities are proving more difficult to live in. The outback is renowned for its social inclusion, for
its concern for the individual and for its community events and quality of life and family benefits.
With each new immigration comes a new skill set, a potential ballet teacher, amateur actor,
sportsperson, and musician, all people of community drive who create classes, opportunity and
richness to remote communities.
Communities that support each other, are stronger. Our opportunities for social inclusion are every
day, and our richness and quality of life, is unique.

Possible Solutions
Tax Reform
The current zonal tax rebate has not been reformed for decades. Its principle recognises that costs of
living in remote and isolated communists are by percentage higher, than those incurred n more
populated areas. A flat 15% income tax rate, applied to current Zone Rebate Regions would secure
local regional economies. A flat tax rebate would encourage local spending, incremental tax benefit is
seen and proven to be, of higher economic impact to local economies. A flat tax deduction paid in
annual tax return may not be as beneficial to the community as lump sums are often used for luxuries
and holidays. Incremental pay rise via pay check encourages more local spending such as going out to
dinner more frequently or going to the races.
The current zonal rebate does not provide adequate rebate and has not been increased for years. The
provision of a 15% tax rebate for residents of the current zone areas would encourage development
and ease cost of living expenses.
There is great potential for manufacturing and opportunities development of crops for food and energy
purposes. However they need to be supported.
Housing Allocation for Returned Servicemen and Women
An achievable growth method for rural and regional areas could be through the allocation of housing
to returned service-men and women in rural and regional centres where they could integrate into the
community. Rural communities are noted for their friendliness and community spirit and would be
ideal for returned servicemen and women to integrate back into normality, following their service.

Conclusions
Consideration to be given to income tax reform for residents of remote Australia. Update the tax
system to provide incentives to move to regional / remote Australia.
Open and rapid decentralisation of government services
Consideration of establishment of satellite health services with resident specialists for those for
frequently presented diagnoses.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 78

Immediate reform and analysis of the cost of transport and FIFO government entity services against
the cost of establishment and the provision of some local services
Immediate action on the cost of transport – please refer to the attached submission to the recent
enquiry into airfares.
Discussion regarding the assessment of business and other loans and insurance levies based on
postcode.
The development of rural and regional Australia is essential to the national economy, equality must be
delivered through services, funding and infrastructure to support growth in rural areas.

References
Australian Bureau Statistics, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Population, 2016 Census Data,
modified 27 March 2018)
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6401.0

Queensland Government Statisticians Office, Regional youth unemployment, March 2018, modified
26 April 2018
http://www.qgso.qld.gov.au/products/reports/reg-youth-unemployment/reg-youth-unemployment201803.pdf

