Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

TO:

Senate Standing Committee on Economics
Enquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional
inequality in Australia

Preamble
Rural Australians for Refugees (RAR) is grateful for the opportunity to contribute to
this enquiry.
RAR’s membership of 90 plus groups is entirely based in rural and regional
Australia, predominantly in Queensland, NSW, Victoria and Tasmania.
The 10,000 or so individual members in those groups come from a broad cross
section of rural and regional life. The groups united in their general view that a
generous approach to humanitarian entry policies can strengthen the fabric of
community life, and that a robust settlement program in rural and regional areas
has benefits both for refugees and for the communities that they live in.
The strategic settlement of Displaced Persons in regional areas after the second
world war is an example of how refugees can benefit regional development: with
building major infrastructure and building human capital and workforce. Since
that deliberate post-war nation-building approach the approach to settling
refugees has given way to a more idiosyncratic and uncoordinated process which
has led concentrations of refugees settling in a few cities and a widening of the
gap between the multicultural experience of city and country.
Apart from that cultural gap, it is now recognised that rural and regional areas
experience deficits in several key areas compared to metropolitan centres. There
are known gaps in available workforce and skills. Ageing and dwindling
populations, especially in small towns, are threaten the existence of schools and
other services and other aspects of community life such as community
organisations and sporting clubs.
It is RAR’s view that a different approach to resettling refugees in regional areas
would go some way to mitigating these deficits and addressing regional inequality.
RAR has been working with research institute Per Capita Australia to develop an
alternative approach based on current, best practice program design, that delivers
an enhanced government resettlement program, and which fits both with the
needs of refugees and those of their host rural communities.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

RAR along with a number of major refugee advocacy groups has also strongly
supported the Community Refugee Sponsorship Initiative. Separate to, and
additional to, the government program this initiative aims to expand and improve
the ways that community groups can work together to bring refugees to Australia
and support them in their first year here.
[http://www.ausrefugeesponsorship.com.au/ ]
The Per Capita research has identified from case studies in Australia the key
elements which are necessary for successful settlement outcomes - both for
regional communities and for the refugees.
Delivering these elements successfully and equitably means that an alternative
approach to the way the refugee program approaches resettlement in rural and
regional centres
The alternative approach we propose seeks to address some of the more obvious
issues and challenges in the present refugee program arrangements, namely:
-

-

-

-

The centralised and silo management of both funding and delivery of
resettlement and associated services and
The haphazard and disjointed coordination of service elements that are
critical to the success of settlement: local (regional specific) workforce
needs and solutions, housing and welfare arrangements and medical and
mental health facilities
The minimal capacity for regional AND refugee communities to input into
service design and standards
Related to this, the centralised basis for funding and accountability to the
communities involved
The lack of engagement with local communities in the apparent increasing
efforts to locate refugee outside of metro areas which appears without
consideration of how the structures and general population may be affected
The decision to settle groups of refugees without family and/or connections
in metro areas apparently to prevent movement to the cities but in fact
placing more pressures on the individuals and regional communities
Related to this the apparently minimal ongoing engagement with refugee
groups about issues and possible mitigation
The confusing proliferation of visa classes and conditions which make it a
task to work with

In summary, the way that employers, services, businesses and community are
engaged in identifying need, and the way that the program is subsequently
managed on the ground will be the basis of the proposed approach.
These are addressed in more detail below.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

Comments on select Terms of Reference

Improved coordination of federal state and local government policies
Current best practice in program design and delivery is informed by the needs of
place and people regardless of the source of funding. Evidence shows that
improved coordination gives not only better outcomes for client and community
but also improved accountability and efficiency in how funding is directed.
Key elements of a place-based approach include:
-

Initial and ongoing community engagement on scope and needs
Co-funding and co-design at a local level.
Local program delivers to locally assessed needs
Local management and case management against agreed outcome
accountabilities
Local accountability for outcomes

The current management and delivery of the refugee program lacks most of these
features. Resettlement into rural and regional areas has been patchy and involved
smaller numbers. There are far fewer civil society organisations specialising in
refugee and settlement issues (than what) and there can be limited capacity to
advocate in the range of federal programs areas involved in amongst dealing with
other examples of regional inequality such as connectivity, education transport
and infrastructure.
In addition, the refugee settlement program has largely operated as an adjunct to
the larger scale migration and temporary entry streams which have somewhat
lesser imperative to provide ongoing support and coordination.
There is currently a groundswell of interest in increasing the numbers of refugees
settling in rural and regional areas in several states. Communities in Queensland,
NSW and Victoria are expressing willingness to be a part of the increase but
concerned that it should NOT happen within the present centralised and metrocentric program parameters.
They are particularly concerned about the possibility of costs shifting onto
communities, whether by intention or design, in circumstances where they are
already struggling for equity in basic service delivery or because of infrastructure
deficits and the tyranny of distance.
In a place-based approach that is based on identified need, funding is
negotiated/identified in advance of implementation. This helps to level out the
kinds of tensions between governments – whether about share, cost-shifting or
deficit up front. It also helps to engage commitment from business and the
community.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

Such a social innovation approach is not new. Variations of the approach have
been applied overseas and in States in Australia and most notably in national
Indigenous Affairs program delivery.
The refugee program which carries both social and economic complexity is ripe for
a trial.
Recommendation:
The approach to resettling increasing numbers of refugees in regional areas of
Australia must be refreshed. A new place-based, co-design approach should be
tested in select regional centres with expressed interest and need with
ongoing evaluation.

Regional development policies
A critical factor in regional development is the ability to service industry and
business with a workforce. Regional Australia is beset by workforce shortages in
critical industries. Agriculture and horticulture, smaller scale manufacturing and
service industries such as aged care experience difficulties in attracting and
retaining workforce.
Quite apart from the direct economic impact, such shortages affect community life
as populations and capital move away.
There is an opportunity in the refugee program to harness the skills and
commitment of refugees seeking to build new lives in a new country and to give
their children opportunities.
Evidence has shown that, properly supported, refugees settling in small to medium
sized rural and regional communities have a better integration experience than
accrues in many metropolitan areas where they may find challenges in finding
affordable housing, where they may have to travel many hours to jobs and where
they may find it more difficult accessing mainstream community structures.
Evidence has also shown that where refugees settle well they quickly become nett
contributors to the economy and to community life.
A proportion of the refugee intake in Australia comes from countries with strong
connection to rural life and agriculture. Others are professionals in occupations in
demand in regional areas. And most are younger, with children of school age and
in some cases have been shown to help to stem the decline in small towns facing
school closures and closing businesses.
Refugees can contribute in several ways, but the key element is in how they are
matched to the regional need.
Different states approach their regional development priorities in different ways
but they all share the fundamental advantage of having a focus that is on

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

place/specified region and in most cases, they have the structures and
connections that might facilitate place-based program delivery.
Such an approach would offer immediate advantages in the access it would provide
to workforce and in the flexibility that would derive from local design and
management to respond to unforeseen and emerging needs.
Recommendation
Select piloting of a place-based model should involve regional development
authorities as central stakeholders with appropriate funding.

Building human capital
Many regional areas are experiencing demographic uncertainties with ageing
populations and a flight of youth to cities for education and work. Many face
challenges because of those demographic changes: loss of businesses and schools
and local dollars, increasing opportunity costs and decreasing range of
participation.
As mentioned above, the injection of younger, stable workforce can contribute to
both economic outcomes in regional communities, but it can also assist with
strengthening the fabric of community life: sporting clubs, services and schools.
Above all communities can benefit from the diversity offered by people from
different cultural and language background.
Enhancing local workforce skills /Employment arrangements
Many refugees have valuable skills, qualifications and experience that they can
bring to local workforce. There are numerous recent examples of refugee doctors
and teachers and technicians bringing their skills to regional communities, often
where a town has found difficulty in recruiting from the city.
Other refugees may be less skilled but willing and able to contribute to seasonal
workforce demands or to develop small local enterprises that contribute meeting
needs in local communities and become employers themselves.
Regardless, evidence shows that, when employed, refugees have greater levels of
commitment to their enterprise.
Other related matters
The smaller size of regional and rural communities can assist in the critical
element of community engagement and communication.
In the eighties and nineties Governments consulted widely with communities as
well as business and unions on the development and composition of the migration
and refugee settlement programs and on service issues. That consultation practice
has diminished along with the rise in the use of centrally managed contracted

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 79

services. The result is often that the program delivery is informed not by needs
but by contract deliverables, leaving clients and community in the cold.
Evidence shows that good up front and ongoing communication and engagement
with stakeholders makes or better policy and program outcomes and of its essence
fosters “buy-in” in the community. The present populist enthusiasm for debate
around borders and multiculturalism makes it more imperative that program
increases and changes, are based in well-conducted engagement practices.
There is also room to consider a rationalisation of visa conditions applying to a
range of categories based on commitment to regional settlement for a specified
period This of course would carry with it the need to make sure that the conditions
are supported by appropriate supports and coordination on the ground and where
necessary, budget allocations.
Social Enterprise
There are opportunities in regional areas to develop both standard and social
enterprise endeavours that refugees can engage in and that deliver triple bottom
line benefits. In rural areas organic waste management and the management of
feral animals are two examples where simple social enterprise models could be
used to provide employment/income for refugees, to produce benefit to local
agriculture and/or food production and deliver solutions to environmental
challenges.
In many regional areas there is a demand for both pest reduction (feral animals,
carp in rivers and so on). With the application of simple technology there is
opportunity for small scale, locally based enterprises to deliver both, to make a
living for the operators and provide employment for others.
Small scale horticultural enterprises using composted organic matter to produce
fresh vegetables for local restaurants and homes could suit refugees from nonurban backgrounds, using their skills and assisting councils with expensive waste
management.
Social benefit would be derived from the fact that refugees could be trained and
gainfully employed with the additional support overheads picked up by enterprise
profits.
RAR understands there are such enterprise models out there now which are simple,
local and self-funding and which would bring nett value to small rural agricultural
communities.
Conclusion
RAR believes that a strategic and considered approach to refugee settlement in
regional Australia will contribute positively to addressing some of the fundamental
inequalities and deficits that exist.
RAR will be pleased to provide more information as required.
May 2018

