Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

AUSTRALIAN

LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ASSOCIATION

8 May 2018

Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600

Dear Committee Secretary
The Australian Local Government Association (ALGA) appreciates the opportunity to
make a submission to the Senate Committee's inquiry into the indicators of, and
impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
ALGA has consulted with its State and Territory Local Government Associations in
preparing the submission. Comments in this paper should be read in conjunction
with separate submissions made by State and Territory Local Government
Associations and councils.
Should you require any further information in relation to the matters raised in this
submission, please contact Lauren Heritage-Brand on telephone

or

email

Yours sincerely

Adrian Beresfo rd-Wyli7
Chief Executive

8 Geils Court Deakin ACT 2600 PHONE 02 6122 9400 FAX 02 6122 9401 EMA IL aloa@alaa .asn .au WEB www.alaa .asn .au

ABN : 31

008 613 876

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

Submission to the Senate Economics
References Committee
In response to the Inquiry into the indicators of,
and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

1.

INTRODUCTION

The Australian Local Government Association (ALGA) welcomes the opportunity to
make a submission to the Standing Committee on Economics and its Inquiry into the
indicators of, and impacts of, regional inequality in Australia. This submission builds
on an increasing awareness and widespread acknowledgement of the important role
of regions in Australia’s economic growth, as well as the challenges and
disadvantages experienced in non-metropolitan areas.
This submission does not seek to repeat in detail what has been previously raised by
local governments, or by State/Territory Local Government Associations, but rather
to highlight information and data that may assist the Committee with its Inquiry and
to reinforce those critical issues that continue to warrant specific attention by the
Commonwealth.
ALGA strongly believes that Australia needs an agreed national long-term strategy
and bipartisan commitment to funding for our regions in order to avoid expensive
inefficiencies and social dysfunction which continue to place added pressures on
public budgets required to fund and support transport networks, housing, critical
infrastructure, health, community services, social cohesion, and capital. Addressing
the twin pressures of global competition and growing inequality in Australian regions
is becoming acute and the challenge needs Commonwealth leadership.

2.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT NATIONALLY

The Australian Local Government Association is the national voice of local
government in Australia. It is a federated body of state and territory local
government associations that represent 537 local government authorities across the
country.
Local Government nationally employs just under 190,000 Australians (around 10 per
cent of the total public sector), owns and manages non-financial assets with an
estimated written down value of $428 billion (2016-17), raises around 3.6 per cent of
Australia’s total taxation revenue per annum and has annual operational expenditure
of more than $35 billion (2016- 17).
Local Government’s expenditure is directed towards the provision of local services
infrastructure across the nation. These services include: housing and community
amenities; transport and communications; recreation and culture, and general public
services.
Independent research commissioned by ALGA in 2012 shows that a majority of
Australians agree that local councils play an important role in their lives.
Considerable local government funds are spent on vital additional work that relate to
broad national issues. By virtue of location, and as the level of government closest
to Australians, Local Government is aware of and understands the myriad of
challenges faced by local and regional communities as they live, work and interact in
2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

an increasingly complex domestic and global environment. Local and regional
communities require support to respond and adapt to factors they cannot control,
such as drought, natural disasters and economic upheavals.
Local Governments strive, wherever possible, to assist communities to overcome
these types of challenges, enhance their capacity to respond to new and unforeseen
challenges and identify opportunities that can help build resilience and increase
overall prosperity.
The Australian Government has shown that it understands and appreciates that
Local Government’s strength lies in its capacity to identify and respond to the diverse
and emerging needs of communities across Australia.
The Australian Government has also shown its commitment to working with Local
Government to achieve real and meaningful outcomes for local and regional
communities. ALGA looks forward to the Government continuing this important
partnership.

3.

RESPONSES TO THE TERMS OF REFERENCE

3.1. Experiences of individual and localities of unequal access to
opportunities and unequal outcomes in non-metropolitan
areas
Experiences cited by the local government sector demonstrating unequal access
and/or outcomes in non-metropolitan areas have included those relating to:
•
•

•

•

transport (such as need to charter aircraft in remote localities and
transportation in regional/rural areas for seniors);
access to allied health and mental health services (noting the recent
commitment of an additional $84Million from the Commonwealth Government
for the Rural Flying Doctor Service for mental and dental health, in
recognition of the problem in rural/regional areas);
access to basic infrastructure such as reasonable road access, clean water
supplies and wastewater services, digital technology and telecommunication
services, and housing, including housing for employees in remote localities
providing social and essential services to the community; and
declining intellectual capital to support local workforce skills needs,
particularly in transforming employment markets.

Separate submissions by Councils and State/Territory Local Government
Associations to this Inquiry, as well as other inquiries on specific topics addressed
under the Terms of Reference (such as the Senate Communities Affairs Committee
Inquiry into accessibility and quality of mental health services in rural and remote
Australia, the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Reference
Committee Inquiry into the operation, regulation and funding of air route service
delivery to rural, regional and remote communities and the Senate Select Committee

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

Inquiry on the Future of Work and Workers) can provide additional case studies and
details.
Regarding telecommunications, ALGA’s policy position on payphones has been that
there must be consultation with the local community before removing
payphones. Payphones remain an essential and valued service in regional and
remote areas. There has been a long history of concern over removing payphones,
with motions passed at the National General Assembly for Local Government over
the years. Specific groups of people have a social need for payphones – to make
emergency calls; people living in rural and remote Australia with unreliable mobile
phone coverage; people on low incomes; indigenous communities where people do
not own mobile phones or share mobile phones.
ALGA’s position over many years has been that telecommunications services,
including high speed broadband, should be equitably delivered and affordably priced
for all Australians and that no group of Australians gets left behind as technologies
become more advanced. Australia’s geographic and demographic challenges mean
that rural and remote areas are often left behind in relation to their urban
counterparts. ALGA has argued that mobile coverage in rural and regional areas is
often inadequate and falls significantly below community expectations. These
communities can also be disadvantaged by having fewer council staff, resources and
expertise.
Attachment B outlines a number of additional resources of information, including the
2015 Regional Telecommunications Review. A Regional Telecommunications
Review is conducted every 3 years and findings highlight the needs of the regions.
The report highlights the importance of mobile coverage in regional Australia, the
potential to maximise benefits from the rollout of the NBN satellite and fixed wireless
networks, and the need to develop consumer safeguards to support regional
Australia. A 2018 review has just been announced.

3.2. Views on inequality between regions, especially between
capital cities and other areas
It should be noted that at an aggregate level, Local Government undertakes its work
while being more than 80% self-funded. However, many rural and regional councils
are not in a position to raise the same revenues as their urban and larger regional
counterparts. As a consequence, they are much more reliant on external funding
sources. Adequate grants are absolutely critical for these councils to be able to
function in the best interests of their residents and to equalise the availability of
services and infrastructure across the community.
Access to financial assistance grants (FAGs) plays a critical role in the financial
sustainability of every Council and especially rural and regional ones. In its 2018-19
Federal Budget Submission, ALGA has called for a restoration of the quantum of
financial assistance grants to at least 1 per cent of Commonwealth taxation revenue
in order to help maintain Australians’ living standards by fostering the equitable
provision of Local Government services and infrastructure and maintaining local
economic growth. FAGs were equal to around 1 per cent of Commonwealth taxation
revenue in 1996, however have declining by around 43 per cent in relative terms
4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

over the past 20 years. They now amount to approximately 0.57 per cent of
Commonwealth revenue. Although this revenue is accessible to both metropolitan
and non-metropolitan Councils, the reliance on FAGs (and other external funding
sources) in non-metropolitan Councils is much higher to sustain levels of services
expected by Australia communities. As such, dwindling resources sees a greater
impact in the regions than in capital cities.

3.3. Analysis of the economics of regional inequality,
including wider impacts
Given the importance of regions, local economic development and local government,
ALGA has commissioned the National Institute of Economic and Industry Research
(National Economics) over the past two decades to prepare a comprehensive State
of the Regions (SOR) report. The annual report, produced and launched at the
Regional Cooperation and Development Forum held in June each year, divides
Australia into 65 regions and analyses how each region is performing on several
metrics. The report also investigates the likely consequences of current and future
economic circumstances and trends for each region and contains a wealth of
interesting analysis.
The objectives of the SOR reports are to:
• present the latest statistical indicators describing how Australian regions are
performing;
• analyse trends in equality and inequality between Australian regions (these
include metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas creating 65 regions
encompassing the Australia nation);
• make suggestions for the policy implications of current Australia regional
performance;
• describe the reality of regional economics;
• assist local government to understand their own region and compare
performance with other regions; and
• to provide local government with useful planning tools.
For the best part of two decades the SOR reports have made the case for greater
Commonwealth (and state) interest in regional economies, including a willingness to
direct investment funds to regional development. For many years the arguments for
central funding of locally-directed economic development strategies made little
headway in the face of a view that free-market policy was delivering prosperity and
economic growth.
A list of the themes for each report is provided in Attachment A, and we refer you to
these valuable data and analytical resources as part of this Inquiry.
Specific attention is drawn to the 2015-16 State of the Regions Report: Addressing
Regional Inequalities. This report particularly speaks to matters on dependence on
sustained innovation as the core driver of long-term economic growth; the capacity to
innovate depends on knowledge and networks at the regional level; the influence of
concentrations of highly skilled global knowledge workers; migration of young
populations from low-income, high-unemployment regions; infrastructure deficiencies

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

and the potential for hinterland commuting from regions into metropolitan areas
through better mass transit solutions.
For detailed analysis and specific questions on data access and interpretation, we
recommend contacting National Economics directly to contribute towards this
Inquiry.

3.4. Examples of solutions; what has caused some regions or
towns to prosper
In partnership with the Australian Government, each year ALGA supports the
National Awards for Local Government, administered by the Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities. These awards are an annual
celebration of Australia local government achievements, and the alumni of winning
projects may provide numerous examples of solutions where some regions or towns
have prospered. Relevant categories include ‘Contributing to Regional Growth’,
‘Boosting Productivity through Infrastructure’ and ‘Innovation to Create More
Liveable and Collaborative Communities’.
The following examples are category winners in the 2017 Awards:
• Gladstone Regional Council, QLD—Waste Powering Gladstone's Greener
Future: The Benaraby Landfill Gas-to-Power Project (Winner, Boosting
Productivity through Infrastructure)
• Meander Valley Council, TAS—Valley Central Industrial Precinct, Westbury,
Tasmania (Winner, Contributing to Regional Growth)
Another potential source of resources to assist the Inquiry are provided in
Attachment B, including work by other organizations that ALGA has been associated
with in relation to local government-related initiatives, studies and projects.

3.5. Policy settings which could help address inequality
between regions
In the 2017-18 State of the Regions Report: Pillars of Regional Growth, National
Economics argue, “If regional economic planning is to be authoritative and effective, it
requires government auspices, not only to ensure that different voices are heard and
balanced in a democratic way, but to provide the impetus to ensure implementation.
In Australia authority is shared between federal, state and local government, and there
is a strong case that the authority of each, should be shared in the preparation and
implementation of regional plans”.

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

4.

CONCLUSION

ALGA welcomes the opportunity to provide this Submission to the Committee’s
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
In closing ALGA reiterates its view that regions are a vital importance to the growth
of the Australian economy, and ongoing impacts within the social, infrastructure,
workforce and industry development and financial sustainability contexts of
rural/regional (non-metropolitan) local governments lead to a growing problem of
inequality.
ALGA encourages the Committee to access the data and analyses provided in the
State of the Regions Reports outlined in Attachment A, with particular attention to the
2015-16 Report Addressing Regional Inequality to guide its work on this important
issue. Additional resources are listed in Attachment B, and includes the work of
other organisations which have focused on local government-related information
relevant to regional inequalities.
Thank you for considering this submission.

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

Attachment A
The State of the Regions (SOR) reports by National Economics are published
annually by the Australian Local Government Association (ALGA). The reports are
launched at the Regional Cooperation and Development Forum, held in Canberra, in
June of each year.
The 2017-18 SOR Pillars of Regional Growth is the twentieth report in the series and
is available for purchase in colour from the ALGA website – www.alga.asn.au.
Previous issues of the reports can be downloaded from the ALGA website or
purchased in print form through ALGA. From mid-2014, early issues of the online
report were made available, free of charge. The 2018 Report will be launched at the
Regional Development and Cooperation Forum on 17 June 2018.
There are two versions of the SOR report available. The full report available from the
ALGA website is an online publication. A summary report is printed and made
available to delegates attending the Regional Forum, the event where the report is
launched which immediately precedes ALGA’s annual National General Assembly of
Australian Local Governments.
Reports available to date are:
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2017-18: PILLARS OF REGIONAL GROWTH
This report revisits the critical question of boosting regional economic productivity. It
examines the levers that can drive growth and thereby assist to tackle the growing
inequality found in parts of Australia. This year’s report continues to build on the
accumulated knowledge of previous State of the Regions to provide a coherent
framework for analyzing the challenging task of contributing to sustainable regional
development and what this means for all levels of government. The report includes a
discussion of the Productivity Commission's Initial Report into Transitioning Regional
Economies and updates the typologies used to describe Australia's regions. It
updates our knowledge of the diverse industry structures and regional economic
base of Australia's 67 regions, and provides a commentary on regional aspects of
the state of income transfers between regions, housing and construction,
employment and skills and local government finance.
This year's report also includes chapters on the growing significance of Intelligent
communities, cyber security and energy.
The report provides extensive data for regions covering all of Australia, that includes
a chapter on the aggregated regional indicators for the nation, as well as the
metropolitan regions of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Perth, and
Northern Australia

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2016-17: SUPPORTING A PROSPEROUS VISITOR
ECONOMY
This report examines Local government’s role in tourism development. Local
government helps to administer many tourist attractions and assists in the
presentation of tourism-related events. It also provides much of the basic
infrastructure which supports the industry, especially transport infrastructure. The
report seeks to better understand the importance and complexity of the visitor
economy from a regional perspective - not only the opportunities for income
generation, but also the associated problems of seasonal and low-wage
employment. The report includes an investigation of the Commonwealth role in local
government finance. It also covers regional aspects of education finance and
regional differences in the pathways from early childhood to satisfying employment.
Regular features included in the report are updates on the structure of regional
incomes, skills and employment, housing and wealth, telecommunications, energy
and climate change. The report provides extensive data for 67 regions covering all
Australia and also includes a chapter on recent economic trends in the major
metropolitan areas of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2015-16: INEQUALITY BETWEEN AND WITHIN REGIONS
This report argues that reducing the inequality of income distribution within and
between Australian regions will be pivotal to strengthening Australia’s economy and
bridging the employment fallout from the subsiding mining boom in low income
regions. The report identifies a need for policies and investments to be implemented
on a region-by-region basis to decrease the existing inequality across Australian
regions. The success of programs such as the Regional and Local Community
Infrastructure Program in 2008-10 and the current Roads to Recovery Program
highlights the value and effectiveness of a direct partnership between the Federal
and Local Governments in delivering major outcomes in job-creation and economic
stimulation.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2014-15: REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN A GLOBALISED
ECONOMY
This report highlights the trend of a widening gap between regions that have
benefited from the mining boom and those that have not and identifies that the
national economy is now in transition, that we have entered into the post mining
boom construction phase and, together with the impact of the high Australian dollar
on many of Australia's manufacturing exporters, this requires growth in other areas
of the economy to maintain Australian living standards. In the immediate term this is
public and private investment in Infrastructure, and increased exporting activity.
Development patterns of the North of Australia are discussed as are the troubling
features of rising youth unemployment.

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2013-14: IT'S TIME TO INNOVATE
The report presents further policy findings that builds on the work commenced by
National Economics in last year's 2012-13 Rethinking Regional Development and
provides further evidence on why a new national approach to regional development
is required and what alternative policy approaches should be considered. The
consequences for the Australian economy and its regions post mining boom are
considered as are the implications, from a social and economic perspective,
of natural disasters and the role of local governments in facing up to these
circumstances.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2012-13: RETHINKING REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The report examines the future of regional development in light of the ongoing
impacts of the patchwork economy, ever tightening fiscal budgets at both the
national and jurisdictional levels, the darkening economic clouds in the United States
of America and Europe. The report considers what changes need to be made to
Australia’s regional development policies to strengthen regional investment.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2011-12: BEYOND THE MINING BOOM
The report critically examines the regional effects of the mining boom from 2005. The
report produces a balanced analysis of both the benefits and costs associated with
the mining boom and the effect the mining boom is having on other industries, as
well as the regional implications as the boom ends. Lessons from Norway are
included as a best practice international case study.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2010-11: THE HOUSING SHORTAGE AND HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY
The report analyses the issues surrounding housing supply. Supply issues lead to
pricing pressures and these impacts are described in their regional context.
Construction activity across the regions is presented.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2008-09: SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT
This report represents a supplement to the 2008-09 Report issued in December
2009.
The supplement complements the original report by noting developments in the
issues surrounding climate change and updates the regional income and labour
market indicators to 2008-09. There is also an update on the impacts of the GFC.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2008-09 AND SUPPLEMENT REPORT: CLIMATE CHANGE
AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
The report and its later supplement continue to focus on the challenges of climate
change, especially given the financial economic crisis engulfing the globe.

10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2007-08: CLIMATE CHANGE
The report focuses on climate change and its implications and impact on Australia’s
diverse regions.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2006-07: THE LANDBOOM
Australia's economic performance over the past decade has been exemplary.
Incomes have increased, unemployment has decreased, and the inflation rate has
remained low. In addition, nearly all home-owners have received gratifying capital
gains. For many, this additional wealth has provided psychological compensation for
increased working hours and reduced employment security.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2005-06: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
The report’s theme is at the very core of the issues that may well shape the
economic development opportunities and competitiveness of Australia's regions. The
Report explores the case for the use of telecommunications infrastructure, to assist
regions improve their performance.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2004-05: INFRASTRUCTURE
The report explores the case for the use of infrastructure development to assist
regions to improve their performance.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2003-04: AGEING, MIGRATION AND POPULATION
CHANGE
The report investigates how ageing, migration and population growth impact on the
economic potential of regions and the revenue raising capacity of local government.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2002-03: REGIONAL ECONOMIC GOVERNANCE
The report discusses the role of regional economic governance and along with the
traditional update of the regional performance indicators, the report focuses on
governance and the linked issue of growing inequality between regions.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2001-02: LEARNING REGIONS
The report looks at jobs and learning regions. The prime concern is how well
Australian regions are positioned to capture the economic development and
employment benefits from the emergence of the knowledge-based or learning
economy.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 2000-01
The report released in December 2000, puts forward a vision for the future of
regional Australia, and practical strategies to enable Australia's regions to attain their
economic and social potential, based on a detailed analysis of their current
performance and prospects. The regional framework adopted allocates the 632

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

LGAs into 58 regions, and examines five indicators of change based on population,
gross regional product, productivity, employment growth and occupational structure.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 1999-00
This is the second report released seeking to improve the level of understanding
about local economies and their regional performance and prospects. The report
presents a regional typology framework based on 57 core metro, dispersed
metropolitan regions, production zones, lifestyle, rural and resourced based regions.
Section 4 of the report models the likely impact of the implementation of National
Competition Policy and estimates the potential impact of the GST on regional
Australia.
STATE OF THE REGIONS REPORT 1998-99
The report was prepared for the delegates attending the First Regional Cooperation
and Development Forum – Sustaining Futures for our Regions held in Canberra on 8
November 1998. Four elements of innovative regional economic development
strategies are examined, as are historic trends over the period 1986 to 1996. The
key indicators used are population, employed residents, unemployment, and real
incomes and skills formation.

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 81

Attachment B
Suggested Other Resources for Local Government-Related Information
Housing
•

Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute
https://www.ahuri.edu.au/

•

ARC Linkage Project: Local Government and Housing in Australia for the 21st
Century
https://localgovernmentandhousing.com/

Regional Development and Studies
•

Regional Australia Institute
http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/home/

•

Committee for Economic Development Australia
https://www.ceda.com.au/

Health and Well Being
•

National Rural Health Alliance
http://ruralhealth.org.au/

•

Australian Institute of Family Studies
https://aifs.gov.au/

•

National Health and Medical Research Council
https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/

Telecommunications
•

Regional Telecommunications Review 2015
https://www.communications.gov.au/who-we-are/department/regionaltelecommunications-review

13

