Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

SENATE INQUIRY –
THE INDICATORS OF & THE IMPACT OF
REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA

SUBMISSION BY
CAIRNS REGIONAL COUNCIL

8 May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

OVERVIEW
The Cairns Region
Although Cairns is well known for its position in tourism in Australia, the city’s primary economic and
social function is as a regional capital – a transport, distribution, manufacturing, administrative and
services hub for the Peninsula Australia Geographic region referred to as Tropical North Queensland
for tourism purposes and often as Far North Queensland (see Map 1).
The major characteristics of the Cairns/Far North Queensland Region that make it vulnerable to
regional inequalities are:
1) The region is geographically large – about one and a half times the State of Victoria and as

deep from north to south as the rest of Queensland and as the State of New South Wales
(see Map 2).
2) The region is distant from the nearest metropolitan centre – Brisbane. The distance from

Cairns to Brisbane is the equivalent to the distance from Brisbane to Melbourne. The
distance from Cairns to the region’s northern most population (Saibai Island) is a further
930km making the distance from Brisbane to the Saibai Island community the equivalent of
Brisbane to a point in the Southern Ocean well south of Tasmania (see Map 3).
3) The regional population of Far North Queensland is approximately 287,000 (2016). Although

the population around Cairns is the densest in northern Australia, the large Gulf Savannah
Sub Region and Peninsula/Torres Sub Region are sparsely populated (see Map 4). The Gulf,
Savannah, Cape York and Torres Strait communities have some of the highest vulnerabilities
to inequality in Australia compared with metropolitan areas (see Table #1 of Socio-Economic
Indexes for Areas (‘SEIFA’) Indices, SEIFA Indices measure the relative level of socio-economic
characteristics of a community based on a range of Census data).
4) As well as the usual resident population, Cairns (as an international tourism centre) also

services a significant visitor population with some 30,000 visitors staying in the region on any
given night. This ‘visiting’ population needs to be taken into account when determining
regional infrastructure and service provision otherwise they may be insufficient to service the
people ‘on the ground’.
5) The Far North Queensland region’s geographic spread of population also impacts access to

health and education services, particularly in more remote parts of the region. This lack of
access contributes to inequality when compared to metropolitan based populations.
6) The Cairns/Far North Queensland Region has a very high Indigenous population of 16% of

total (Cairns City 9%) (see Table #2), as well as (for a regional city), a high level of resident
population from overseas (31.2%) and interstate.
7) The region is deep into the tropics and historically posed greater challenges to development

than southern Australia – challenges that have increasingly been met resulting in strong
(albeit fluctuating) economic and population growth ahead of most regional areas of
Australia.
8) The region can be subject to significant weather events, in particular cyclones and heavy

rains/flooding. As well as the risk to personal safety, these events have the potential to
adversely impact access to services particularly where roads are ‘cut’ or where transport
infrastructure such as railways, airports or seaports are restricted. Such ‘cuts’ in transport
links also adversely impacts the regional economy through the inability to get goods and
services ‘to market’.
9) Costs of living and doing business in the Cairns and Far North Queensland region are also a

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

potential cause of inequality. Fuel, insurance and energy costs are key examples in this
regard and are impacted by the region’s geographic location and the lack of high levels of
competition in some sectors.

Recommendation 1
It is submitted:
a) That the best way to overcome many of these inequalities is to bring metropolitan level

services to Cairns;
b) That Cairns and the region is now of a population size to support many of these services; and
c)

That complementing these increased services in Cairns must be major improvements in
transport and related infrastructure to ensure connectivity between Cairns and the
surrounding Far North Queensland region so the improved services are easily accessible by
the regional population more broadly.

It is further submitted that if this investment takes place, underlying economic conditions and the
recent history of regional growth is such that national and regional economic and social benefits will
be realised as a result.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Map 1: Area Covered by the Far North Queensland Regional Organisation of Councils
in the Cape York Peninsula Australia/Tropical North Queensland Geographic Region

Source: Cummings Economics 2018.
Map 2: Areas Compared

Source: Cummings Economics 2018.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Map 3: Distances

Source: Cummings Economics 2018.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Map 4: Peninsula Australia/TNQ Sub Regions & Service Centres

Source: Cummings Economics 2018.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Table #1: SEIFA Indices – Cairns/Peninsula Australia/Tropical North Queensland Region

Score

Decile

Score

Decile

Index of
Economic
Resources
Decile

1048

9

1060

10

8

9

CAIRNS
Douglas
Cassowary Coast
Tablelands
Mareeba

980
981
931
949
936

6
6
3
4
3

971
959
912
932
926

6
5
2
3
3

4
4
3
3
3

7
7
2
4
4

Etheridge
Croydon
Carpentaria
Burke

932
884
858
921

3
1
1
2

929
897
874
921

3
2
1
3

4
2
1
1

3
2
2
4

917
1064
518
596
621
595
580
652
548
624
504
688
694

2
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

915
1047
651
694
699
696
676
731
660
715
641
769
771

2
9
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
9
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

901
672

2
1

933
759

3
1

1
1

8
2

1

1

Local Authority
BRISBANE

Cook
Weipa
Yarrabah
Wujal Wujal
Hope Vale
Lockhart
Kowanyama
Pormpuraaw
Doomadgee
Mornington Island
Aurukun
Mapoon
NPA
Torres
Torres Islands

Disadvantage

Advantage & Disadvantage

Napranum
570
1
665
1
 Denotes Deciles 5 and above.
Source: Cummings Economics from Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Cat No. 2033.0 & 55.001.

Table #2: Current Numbers & Proportion of Population Indigenous, (Usual Place of Residence), Census 2016
FNQROC/LGAs
No.
Cairns
14,099
Carpentaria
803
Cassowary Coast
2,802
Cook
925
Croydon
50
Douglas
897
Etheridge
42
Hinchinbrook
661
Hopevale
846
Mareeba
2,802
Tablelands
1,825
Wujal Wujal
262
Yarrabah
2,494
Total FNQROC
28,513
Non-FNQROC
16,690
Total Peninsula Australia/TNQ
45,203
Source: Cummings Economics from ABS Census 2016.

Index of
Education &
Occupation
Decile

%
9%
41%
10%
22%
17%
8%
5%
6%
92%
13%
7%
93%
97%
11%
74%
16%

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Relationship With Other Regional Areas
While there is some degree of commonality in regional areas of vulnerability to inequalities, it needs
to be recognised that there is a strong regional structure around Australia, that there are differences
between regions and especially those in the North compared with southern Australia.
Recommendation 2
It is submitted that in principle, the approach to regional development should be led by the local
regional community who are most familiar with their opportunities and needs with the role of the
State and Federal Governments being cooperative support in providing infrastructure and services
that are their responsibility and a policy framework conducive to regional wellbeing and progress.
In the North, the size of the seven major well established and historic regions (see Map 5), in many
ways parallels the six states across southern Australia and although populations are lower, this
regional structure needs to be respected and reinforced and each treated as a distinct entity for
regional development policy purposes. Map 6 of regional air services in northern Queensland
illustrates these distinct regional structures.
In the past, because of low populations, there has been a tendency to concentrate infrastructure
spending and services in Townsville and Darwin. It is important to recognise the new levels and
patterns of regional population in the North and to provide infrastructure and services on a wider
basis to maximise progress and to provide a more equitable delivery of services. Table #3 illustrates.
Table #3: Value of Building Approvals, Public Sector, Major Northern Regions, 2011-12 to 2015-16
Cairns
Townsville
SA4 Region
SA4 Region
2011-12
$50 m
$273 m
2012-13
$31 m
$245 m
2013-14
$34 m
$78 m
2014-15
$24 m
$80 m
2015-16
$54 m
$147 m
Total
$193 m
$823 m
Source: Cummings Economics from Australian Bureau of Statistics Cat No. 8731.0.

Fitzroy
SA4 Region
$66 m
$200 m
$80 m
$23 m
$61 m
$430 m

Northern
Territory
$202 m
$301 m
$220 m
$254 m
$569 m
$1,546 m

Note: The SA4 (Statistical Area Level 4) region in Queensland covers the regional centres of Cairns,
Townsville and Rockhampton and their immediate surrounding region – in the case of Cairns it
includes Cassowary Coast, Tablelands, much of Mareeba Shire and Douglas Shire.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Map 5: Major Economic Regions, Northern Australia

Source: Cummings Economics 2018.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Map 6: Regional Scheduled Air Services in Northern Australia

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Regional Economic Background
Over the past 40 years, the Cairns/TNQ region has produced the largest population growth in northern
Australia and is now the largest in population.
Chart #1: Estimated Residential Population, Northern Australia Regions, 1976 & 2016
300,000
250,000

264,060

245,740

226,314

200,000
150,000

287,199

173,892
144,050

177,240
128,030
98,228

89,500

100,000

99,827
55,550

50,000
0
Rockhampton
Central QLD
Region

Mackay Region

Townsville / NQ Cairns Peninsula /
Region
TNQ Region
1976
2016

Darwin / NT

Kimberley /
Pilbara

Note Boundaries:

Rockhampton/Gladstone Region – Fitzroy plus Central West.

Townville Region – Townsville SA4 plus Queensland Outback North less Carpentaria SA2.

Cairns Region – Cairns SA4 plus Queensland Outback Far North plus Carpentaria SA2.
Note: Hinchinbrook Shire included with Townsville/NQ.
Source: Cummings Economics from Australian Bureau of Statistics Cat No. 3218.0 et al.

In on-the-ground Census count population including visitors, it is now well over the 300,000 mark. Apart
from growth in the city of Cairns, the regional hinterland has a substantial and expanding population.
The region is tropical and faced early historic challenges to growth. However, the region is not poor in
underlying resources accounting for 26% of Australia’s water runoff with outstanding terrestrial and
marine biological resources and substantial mineral resources.
Underlying forces have been conducive to development of these resources:
o
o
o
o

Growing global markets especially nearby in Eastern Asia;
Improving transport and communications breaking down old cost barriers of remoteness;
Technology developed suitable to the tropics;
Success breeds success factors.

Standing behind the region’s growth over the last 40 years has been a major expansion of “outside”
earnings (regional exports), from a large expansion of agriculture (the region is now Australia’s third
largest fruit producer), fisheries, mining and the region’s development as a leading domestic and
international tourism destination. This growth has provided the foundations in a modern economy for
an expansion of manufacturing and service industries some of which have developed markets outside
the region in Australia, across the North and into the nearby Papua New Guinea/Pacific area including
the region’s substantial marine and aviation servicing sectors and international education. Cairns has
also become Australia’s north-eastern operational naval base and coastal surveillance centre.
This growth has also laid the foundations for expanding provision of regional services in health,
education, recreation, cultural and sporting facilities, especially located in Cairns as the regional hub city
with major benefits not only to Cairns residents, but to residents throughout the Far North Queensland
region.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Inequality
The following provides key demographic and economic measures for the Cairns Local Government Area
compared with the Brisbane Local Government Area, 2016 Census indicating especially the low level of
provision of higher education.
Table #4: Inequality Measures Compared with Brisbane, Census 2016
Median Weekly Income
Internet Connected to Dwelling
Unemployment Rate
Average Motor Vehicle per Household
Proportion Professional in Workforce
Proportion Attending Educational Institution
Attending University or Tertiary Education Institution
Level of Education Bachelors Degree of Higher
Source: Cummings Economics from ABS, Census 2016.

Cairns
LGA
$693
82.3%
7.7%
1.7
19.2%

Brisbane
LGA
$770
88.0%
6.8%
1.7
29.9%

10.4%

26.6%

16.2%

32.6%

TERMS OF REFERENCE
Fiscal Policies
Most regional economies are fairly narrowly based and heavily dependent on “base” industries that
earn income from outside the region. The Cairns’ regional economy is fortunate in having a range of
“base” industries. However they are mostly highly exposed to world market conditions and
international trade competition. It is vital that fiscal and monetary policies do not further contribute to
instability for regional trade exposed industries, as occurred during the mining boom, when government
deficits and countervailing higher interest rates (compared with overseas) helped lead to a sky rocketing
Australian dollar with major detrimental impacts on tourism, manufacturing and other trade exposed
industries.
Chart #2 illustrates the movements in the Australian dollar during this period.
Chart #2: Australian Dollar Trade Weighted Index

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

The following table gives interest rates October 2011, compared with other major countries.
Table #5: Comparative Official Interest Rates, October 2011
Percent
Australia

4.75%

European Central Bank

1.25%

Canada

1.00%

Bank of England

0.50%

USA

0.13%

Japan
Source: Reserve Bank of Australia, Table F13.

0.50%

The following chart illustrates what happened to tourist expenditure in the region during this period.
Chart #3: Tourism Expenditure, Tropical NQ Region, Overnight Visitors Nominal & Real
3500

LOW POINT
REAL (-25%)

3000



2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Nominal $M

2011

Real

2012

2013

2014

2015

Source: Cummings Economics from Tourism Research Australia.

Recommendation 3
That the Committee’s report emphasises the need for overall fiscal and monetary policy to aim at
maintaining stability in the levels of the Australian dollar. We note that the Reserve Bank of Australia
has, as part of its role, a duty to ensure that its policies and powers are exercised in such a manner as to
best contribute to the stability of the currency of Australia.
Recommendation 4
In relation to individual regions, it is difficult to track through the levels of Commonwealth Government
capital and recurrent expenditure budgets to assess its impact on regional economies.
It is recommended that in presenting the Federal budget, summaries be developed showing the
expenditure relating to individual regions at the SA4 or other suitable level to enable analysis of regional
Federal Government investment to be undertaken.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

IMPROVED COORDINATION
See Recommendation 2 above.
There are a number of avenues available for receipt of grant moneys for specific projects at a regional
level from both the Federal and State Governments. Many of these programs are contestable, involve
significant resources in the preparation and lodgement of multiple applications, are administered by a
number of different government departments and have a variety of differing assessment criteria. For
local governments, this can result in a piecemeal approach to infrastructure funding with potential for
inconsistency with overall regional infrastructure priorities. In particular, there is potential for the
assessment and criteria for grant programs to influence infrastructure investment decisions when in
fact, infrastructure investment should occur on a ‘needs’ basis with grant programs providing an avenue
for funding these priority investments.
Recommendation 5
It is recommended that a review of the approach adopted for grant funding of regional infrastructure
projects be undertaken. Ideally, regional infrastructure priorities should first be set through close tripartite (Federal, State and Local) government and stakeholder collaboration and consultation. These
priorities should be based on the needs of a particular region taking into account constraints on socioeconomic advantage as well as opportunities that align with a region’s particular competitive
advantages. Once regional infrastructure priorities have been clearly established, grant and funding
programs should then align with those priorities and be administered at a consolidated level rather than
through individual departments. We understand the Federal Government’s City Deal program provides
a basis for tri-partite government collaboration in this regard. The Cairns and FNQ region would benefit
from access to this program.

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES
See Recommendation 2 above.
Regional Development Australia (‘RDA’) Boards provide a valuable connection between government and
stakeholders in regional areas and support economic development opportunities. Cairns Regional
Council works closely with representatives of RDA Far North Queensland and Torres Strait Inc. The
Chair of RDA boards is appointed by the Federal Minister for Regional Development in consultation with
state, territory and local government counterparts where appropriate. The RDA Chair appoints the
Deputy Chair and Committee Members after agreement is provided from the Minister for Regional
Development and state, territory and local government counterparts where appropriate.
Recommendation 6
It is recommended that appointments of Regional Development Australia boards have greater
involvement of local authorities as elected representatives of the community.

INFRASTRUCTURE
There is a massive need in the Cairns region for expenditure on infrastructure to bring it up to
appropriate levels. History has shown that this investment in infrastructure can bring major rewards in
both economic stimulus and positive impacts on the quality of life of a community.
As an example, the $35 million spent on upgrading Cairns airport in the early 1980s played a major role
in switching on billions of dollars in investment and recurrent tourism income now worth $3 billion a

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

year.
Cairns Regional Council is appreciative of the Federal Government making the Northern Australia
Infrastructure Facility (‘NAIF’) available to support investment in key infrastructure priorities across
Northern Australia. Having said this, to date, no projects in the Far North Queensland region have
received NAIF funding. Cairns Regional Council welcomes the recent changes in the NAIF lending
guidelines which are expected to increase the pool of projects potentially eligible for NAIF funding. A
further broadening of the fund to include an element of grant funding for regional infrastructure
projects in Northern Australia would also be welcomed.
It is also noted that local governments are not listed as ‘partners’ on the Office of Northern Australia
website whilst Federal Government departments and relevant State and Territory Governments are.
Whilst this may be an unintentional oversight, it is important that local authorities be actively engaged
in the policies and investment relevant to the development of Northern Australia.
Recommendation 7
It is recommended that the current Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility be paralleled by another
special “non-loan” fund.
Recommendation 8
That relevant local regional authorities (Councils) be included as key partners for the Office of Northern
Australia and actively engaged with in the process of formulating policy and investment initiatives aimed
at developing the Northern Australia region.

INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
It is noted that the Cairns and Far North Queensland region is the gateway to two of the world’s greatest
natural treasures in the World Heritage Listed Great Barrier Reef and Wet Tropics Rainforest. The
region’s unique natural assets also underpin key facets of the regional economy. Appropriate
environmental protections are critically important but also need to be underpinned by comprehensive
scientific research and local input.
Recommendation 9
It is recommended that environmental policies affecting infrastructure development in regional areas be
based on science and take into account local input.

CONNECTIVITY
Connectivity is an important element of removing regional inequality. Connectivity has two elements:




Physical connectivity – Physical connectivity enables regional populations to travel efficiently,
safely, reliably and cost effectively both within region and outside region. Physical connectivity
also facilitates trade and investment opportunities within region, within Australia and
throughout the world. Key infrastructure supporting physical connectivity includes the road
network, railways, airports, seaports and public transport.
Digital connectivity – Digital connectivity facilitates community access to data and information
which can be used for a range of personal and business/economic reasons. In areas where
physical connectivity is problematic, digital connectivity is even more critical.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Without strong physical and/or digital connectivity, regional communities are placed at a disadvantage
to metropolitan areas, a factor which can lead to regional inequality.
For Cairns, the domestic and international airports are particularly important to regional development
and community quality of life. The majority of visiting domestic and international tourists
(approximately 3 million per year) access the region via the airport. It also provides the Far Northern
community with direct access to many Australian cities as well as direct access to Asia and connectivity
beyond. The airport also facilitates trade and investment opportunities particularly with the emergent
Chinese and Asian markets and also underpins the region’s growing international education sector.
Ongoing investment in airline route development has the potential to further grow the regional
economy of Far North Queensland and reduce regional inequality through improved physical
connectivity.
Recommendation 10
That investment and policy making decisions at a Federal level acknowledge the key role that physical
and digital connectivity plays in regional inequality and ensures that appropriate measures are
implemented to address this.

PRIVATE INVESTMENT
The level of private investment in regional areas also plays a significant role in regional economic
development and job creation, both of which can help address levels of inequality. Private investment
decisions take into account the relative risk and return of competing investment alternatives and
locations. To promote private investment in regional centres and regional infrastructure, policies and
programs which support investment returns or reduce risk for private investors should be considered.
Recommendation 11
In addition to the recommendations relating to the NAIF outlined earlier, the following are examples of
policies that should be considered:




Reduced corporate tax rate (even for temporary periods following investment) for new catalytic
private investment projects in designated regional areas;
Access to accelerated capital allowances for private capital investment in designated regional
areas; and
150% tax deductibility for costs incurred by businesses in relocating operations to designated
regional areas.

EDUCATION
The region is poorly served in availability of higher education, given its population. Private enterprise is
leading the development of international education in the Cairns region but the city and region are still
behind cities of comparable size in this regard (see Table below), resulting in a substantial inequality of
opportunity as against other equivalent cities and regions, let alone against metropolitan centres.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

Table #6: Comparative Employment in Higher (University Level) Education, 2016 Census
Cairns & Equivalent Sized Cities (Significant Urban Areas) (employment per 1000 head of pop’n)
Higher Education
Employment
Hobart
2,151
Townsville
1,626
Cairns
606
Darwin
1,059
Toowoomba
1,458
Ballarat
1,057
Source: Cummings Economics from ABS Census 2016.
SUA

Population
15 – 59 years
118,306
109,928
89,243
83,982
74,707
57,847

Ratio per
1000 head
18.8
14.8
6.8
12.6
19.5
18.3

Growth
2011-2016
20.2%
11.0%
27.0%
18.7%
23.7%
21.8%

Recommendation 12
Consideration should be given to policies which promote and encourage the establishment and
expansion of regional tertiary institutions as access to high quality tertiary education ‘in region’ is a key
factor in addressing regional inequality. It also assists with regional economic diversification and the
retention of human intellectual capital in region following degree completion.

BUILDING HUMAN CAPITAL, ENHANCING LOCAL WORFORCE SKILLS & EMPLOYMENT
ARRANGEMENTS
See Recommendation 2 above.
Variability of the pace and composition of growth over time and the difference between regions leads to
a need for quick targeted responses that can come only from regionally led responses.
For instance, during the mining boom, a problem was faced from demand with high wages being offered
for skilled tradesmen with a negative effect on Cairns substantial marine servicing sector including three
shipyards.
Today, after construction being lower for a period, there is a sudden resurgence in need for skilled
construction workers that is requiring attention.
Thanks to local initiatives, the region has been successful in complementing its substantial maritime and
aviation servicing sectors with the Cairns Great Barrier Reef International Marine College and Cairns
Aviation Skills Centre providing specialist training.

DECENTRALISATION POLICIES
There is often a lack of appreciation of the role of regional economies, especially in producing
export incomes, in underpinning the nation’s progress and standard of living.
Major productivity gains over the years often means that expanding production is not reflected in
on-farm, on-mine, on-vessel, on-tourism attractions employment, leading to relatively slow growth
of regional workforce and population. Trends to FIFO while benefiting Cairns, has made the
situation worse in remoter areas.
It is vital that services are kept up to and expanded for rural populations, if the efficient production
of exports and foodstuffs is to continue.
In the Cairns region, where strong additional resource based development is an opportunity, this
question comes through to one of provision of infrastructure and services in decentralised areas as
a platform for achieving that growth and one of bringing higher order services to Cairns to bring

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

their availability closer to the decentralised opportunities.
Regional decision making helps get this balance right.
Recommendation 13
That the major decentralisation need is for Federal and State Governments to respond in an adequate
and timely fashion to meeting infrastructure and service needs in the regions.

ENERGY AND OTHER COSTS
A current issue is the high cost of energy. Surveying for Queensland Electricity Users Network provided
evidence of how this was detrimentally affecting business and industry viability in regional areas.
In Queensland, as a major decentralisation policy, the State Government has adopted a Uniform Tariff
Policy. Without it, power prices in many decentralised areas would rise to crippling levels significantly
constraining regional economic development and therefore equality.
Other costs of living/business that also impact regional inequality include insurance costs and fuel
prices.
Recommendation 14
That the Queensland Government be encouraged to keep the Uniform Tariff Policy in place. Similar
policies which support regional competiveness and cost structures (such as insurance costs, fuel prices
etc) should also be considered.
That continued investment and support for regional renewable energy projects/solutions also be
forthcoming to underpin regional energy security and competitiveness.

INNOVATION
The Far North Queensland region has come out of a remote tropical frontier status and although
progressing strongly, it is still important to develop technology specially adapted to tropical needs and
its economic structure.
The region has a history of innovation:
o

In mechanisation of agricultural industries like sugar, tea and coffee;

o

In animal breeding adapted to the tropics;

o

In selection and introduction of new fruits, vegetables and tropical ornamentals;

o

In landscaping in tropical areas; and

o

In overcoming tropical diseases like malaria, and dengue fever (recent).

It is important to recognise that much of these important advances have come through private
enterprise and entrepreneurship and it is vital that conditions are kept favourable.

MANUFACTURING
There are three types of manufacturing in the region:
1) Primary product and mineral processing located where the resources are located;
2) Local community and regional service manufacturing; and

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

3) Skills based manufacturing that has broken out of immediate local and regional markets to earn

income from outside the region to service wider state, national and international markets.
By and large in the northern regions, the first two predominate and there is little of the third. The
northern regions have been too ‘off-centre’ from national markets to develop much of this third class of
manufacturing.
The Cairns region however, has developed the third type in the foundry at Innisfail and its marine
industry sector including shipyards and its aviation servicing sector.
Statistical data indicates a strong drop in manufacturing employment in the region over the last 10 years
but slightly less than State and National averages.
The impact of a high Australian dollar and loss of competitiveness is indicated by the fact that in the
1960s, the bauxite mine at Weipa was built by a Cairns engineering firm. Engineering elements for the
latest expansion are believed to be coming from China.

MONETARY POLICIES & REGULATION
A current problem facing the city and region is availability of finance for business development and
investment.
While the region’s economy and population is on the rise, there are widespread reports of the
curtailment of bank lending, brought about by conditions in the property market in metropolitan
centres and the collapse of the mining boom affecting some centres, is leading to curtailment of finance
in geographical areas where these problems do not exist and there is a need for investment. Low rental
vacancy rates in Cairns, historically low unemployment, a pipeline of public and private infrastructure
projects and continued population growth would ordinarily be expected to result in increased supply of
residential housing to meet anticipated demand. However, reports indicate that APRA’s restrictions on
the investment lending of ADI’s is translating into the reduced availability of investment finance. For
Cairns, this has the potential to act as a constraint on economic growth with housing supply potentially
unable to meet anticipated demand.
Recommendation 15
That the Committee engage with APRA to review the impacts of lending policy restrictions on regional
centres with growth potential and to investigate ways in which this potential constraint to growth could
be addressed.

REGIONAL STATISTICS
There are real problems with the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Labour Force Series in providing
reliable data at a regional level. This is causing substantial confusion and problems. Further details on
the shortcomings in this data at a regional level can be supplied if required. It is essential that official
data released at regional level be accurate to inspire confidence in decision making.
Recommendation 16
That the Committee investigate the availability and reliability of statistical data necessary for sound
decision making at a regional level.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

TRANSPORT & COMMUNICATION
Transport and communication costs play a pivotal role in creating situations of inequality. It goes
without saying that the Cairns region is highly vulnerable to high costs of transport and communication.
Transport cost reductions over time has helped much of the growth in tourism and fruit production. The
region has a major stake in competition to keep airfares down and airport costs competitive.
International communication links through the development of mobile phones, ATMs and the like have
been an important factor in facilitating global travel with benefits to the region. As with other regions, it
is vital to keep up and maximise opportunities digital advances can bring.
In the provision of education, health and a number of other services, there are two approaches. One is
to subsidise travel to metropolitan centres. The other is to subsidise the provision of services in regional
areas. Having to travel to access education and health services will often involve a need for
accompanying family travel, involving additional cost and social dislocation. Subsidising travel usually
does not fully compensate the real costs of dislocation involved.
Recommendation 17
That, as a principle, subsidisation err on the side of providing services as close as possible to regional
populations rather than having regional populations having to travel to access services in metropolitan
areas.

HEALTH
The Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Services region is now the largest in central and northern
Queensland and services a number of the region’s most disadvantaged communities.
Table #7: Hospital Admissions, Cairns & Hinterland Health & Hospital Services District Compared, 2015-2016

Total
Income per
Income
Admissions
Admission
Cairns & Hinterland
97,180
$839 m
$8,600
Townsville
75,172
$864 m
$11,500
Mackay
47,338
$367 m
$7,600
Central Queensland
61,500
$518 m
$8,400
Source: Cummings Economics from Annual Report 2015-16, Hospital & Health Service Regions.
Hospital & Health Service

Patients are still often required to travel to Townsville or Brisbane for higher order services often
requiring families to travel also. While this poses difficulties for Cairns residents, for residents in the
Torres Strait, almost a thousand km further north with low incomes to start with, it is extremely
undesirable. It is vital that higher order services continue to expand in Cairns to service the region’s
significant population base.
Recommendation 18
That Cairns Hospital status be brought up to University Hospital level for funding purposes to ensure the
hospital is able to provide the majority of services required by the Far North Queensland resident and
visiting population.

INEQUALITY CONSEQUENCES OF A HIGH INDIGENOUS POPULATION
Indigenous populations throughout Australia tend to have low levels of education, low levels of
workforce skills, low levels of workforce participation, high levels of unemployment and lower incomes

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 82

and ability to pay for private services and higher health expenditure needs.
These special needs to overcome inequality need to be regarded as additional in those communities
where there is a high level of indigenous population. In these situations, allocation of funding using a
simple per capita basis will leave the region disadvantaged to other regions.
Recommendation 19
That in regions and communities with high indigenous population, the special needs in fields like
education, social and health services be recognised in public funding and provided over and above
normal per capita allocations.

OLDER POPULATION
There has been a long history in the region of older people retiring to the south with the availability of
medical services a major factor, although historic factors of children moving south for job opportunities
have also contributed.
It is important that medical facilities in the region and other services for older population continue to
develop.
Recommendation 20
That in the allocation of funding, the special needs of older persons for health related services in
regional areas be recognised to avoid a need for older persons to have to move from their traditional
community.

REMOTE AREAS
It is vital to reduction in inequality of services that grants commission funding for local governments and
state governments continue to have an equalisation of services factor in it.

