Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87

© ws

COUNCIL

4 May 2018

Senator Jane Hume

Chair, Senate Standing Committee on Economics
PO Box 6100

Parliament House

Canberra ACT 2600

Dear Senator
SUBMISSION TO REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA INQUIRY

It is my pleasure to provide comments to the Committee on the issue of regional inequality in Australia, and
make the case that there is much that the Commonwealth can do to close this gap between regional and
metropolitan amenities and opportunities.

The terms of reference for your inquiry state that the inquiry will focus on the indicators of, and impact of,
regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to government policies and programs in the
following areas:

»

) fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
) improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;

a

c) regional development policies;
) infrastructure;

e) education;

f) building human capital;

g) enhancing local workforce skills;

h) employment arrangements;

i) decentralisation policies;

j) innovation;

k) manufacturing; and

!) any other related matters.

General Comments

The Pilbara is undoubtedly at the epicentre of Australia’s resources investment boom. In terms of iron ore,
Australia accounts for 30% of global production. Of that, 94% comes from the Pilbara, a region which now
also boasts 70% of Australia’s natural gas. The value can be measured as 17% of Australia’s Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), more than 1.5 times the GDP of New Zealand and higher than 117 of the world’s 184
countries.

Before the State Government's Royalties for Regions was implemented in 2008, most of this value was
literally extracted from the ground and shipped to Canberra or Perth, a great chasm between wealth
creation and settlement growth. Investments by the State Government through this program have
redirected that value to the Pilbara, however due to the effect of the Goods and Service Tax (GST) on the

 
4 Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87

Western Australian economy and government budget, the region still does not receive an investment
commensurate with the wealth it generates.

Gross Regional Product per capita for the Pilbara is $450,000 - a full 6 times more than the Gross Domestic
Product per capital of $74,000. If the Pilbara received 6 times more investment per person than the average
Australian, many of the issues facing the Pilbara would disappear overnight.

This ‘net value drain’ is complemented by a confusing web of government priorities which often have the
effect of giving with the left hand and taking with the right.

TOR A - D: Coordinated Policies Across Government for Future Grown

As mentioned in this submission’s opening statements, quite often the Pilbara Regional Council encounters
scenarios whereby one government or department provides an incentive that negates the efforts of another
government or department. This leads to concern amongst regional communities leaders that a lack of
coordination and/or statesmanship will lead to a lot of talk of progress, but none of the actual thing.

This is especially since this issue appears with the backdrop of GST revenue flowing east whilst strategies
shill the north. If Western Australia’s share of this revenue is below appropriate, consider for a moment the
share the north-west receives of this, compared to the economic impact it has on the national accounts.

Tax incentives drain the regional economy at the same time as investments pour in. The world embraces
change and innovates whilst old thinking and slow-to-react government means much of the benefit passes
us by. The Commonwealth identifies a future for the north and provides funds, and it all goes to
Queensland because the Government of Western Australia hasn't done the necessary planning to meet the
challenge of the north.

We need to get our game together.

The Pilbara Regional Council is willing to put a shoulder to the wheel in this regard by outlining challenges
and proposing reforms. Below are several examples of these restrictions on growth, as well as several other
challenges faced by regional economies seeking to transition away from dependence on the mining
investment boom to a more sustainable and diversified economic base.

The clearest example of this is the Fringe Benefits Tax exemption for fly-in-fly-out arrangements (FIFO). On
the one hand, both state and federal governments invest in Pilbara programs and infrastructure to increase
the liveability of the region, and on the other hand they provide mining companies with a tax exemption
which puts upward pressure on flights for residents, preventing them from travelling to Perth.

In short, residents need flights to be cheap but don't mind if they aren‘t regular, and miners need flights to
be regular and don't mind if they aren't cheap, because they pay no FBT tax on them.

If free market forces were at play, demand and supply for seats would dictate that the price would either fall
to fill additional seats, or that the number of flights would fall to remove excess capacity. Regular but half
empty flights serve the interests of the major resource companies, who given the overall cost-benefit
analysis of flying their workforce into the region, have determined paying higher fares is acceptable as long
as they have access to regular flights.

It is this distortion of standard economic principles that is in effect punishing Pilbara residents for their vast
natural resources and enormous contribution to the Australia’s economy. Meanwhile through programs like
Royalties for Regions, significant public funds have been invested in regions like the Pilbara with the
purpose of ‘developing Western Australia's regional areas into strong and vibrant regional communities that

are desirable places to live, work and invest.’
fl PILBARA

Page 2 of 5 ©) COUNCIL
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87

Improving services, attaining sustainability, expanding opportunity and growing prosperity are just some of
the key objectives, yet the effect of demand distorted airways limits the effectiveness of these objectives by
restricting access to markets and slowing tourism.

The world over, areas of strategic economic importance are given special economic status as stand-alone
zones with competitive incentives to entice large corporations and investors to focus their capital into a
particular area.

Whether Australia likes the model or not, the truth of the matter is that without reconciling ourselves with its
potential application in our context, we are waving goodbye to billions in opportunity lost. In terms of the
mining investment space, sheer realities of the resources we possess and international demand for them has
largely been the driver of this foreign direct investment. However the challenge is to replicating that level of
success and investment in other, less demand-driven markets such as agriculture development and tourism.

As the Pilbara seeks to transition to a more sustainable and diversified economic base, it understands that
its strategic context both for the nation and the international business community will not disappear.
Transitioning to a more sustainable and diversified economic base will not occur in isolation for the Pilbara,
but rather in the continuing context of the iron ore and liquid natural gas expansions, constructions and
production.

Recommendation #1: That the Commonwealth, State’s and Regional Local Governments come together to
develop a multi-level government development plan for each region, starting with the Pilbara, to
coordinate investments, infrastructure priorities and key regional policies across all levels of government.

Recommendation #2: That the Commonwealth Government revise the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act
to modify FIFO exemptions from ‘full’ to ‘partial’, thus removing the most egregious example of
mismatched policy objectives and settings, and providing a new source of revenue for investment.

Recommendation #3: That the Commonwealth Government re-consider its position on special economic
zones as an effective method of governing federal, state, local government and industry cooperation in the
future of key regions across Australia.

TOR E - H: People-centred Policies for a More Populous and Prosperous North

The Northern Australia White Paper seeks to develop the north into an Australian trade gateway. With the
rise in Asian populations causing with a rapid increase in the middle class - especially in China - strategic
investment into the agriculture and services sectors will be major drivers of future economic growth in the
north. Just as high demand for iron ore and natural gas has led to major capital investment in the resources
industry in the north, the rise in Asian middle class populations has the potential of drive future investments.

As Government continues to enable business success through policy coordination, the north-west will grow
from strength to strength towards the overarching goal of a stronger and more prosperous Australia.

This Federal Government vision is not at odds with State Government policy; on the contrary, there is
significant support for the goal of diversifying the north-west in order to take advantage of new markets and
develop new industries.

Whilst some of the language differs, the Pilbara Development Commission's Investment Blueprint, the
Royalties for Regions fund and the broader White Paper have clear shared goals. Building regional
capacity, enabling business development through critical infrastructure investment, diversifying the Pilbara

(SX PILBARA
Page 3 of 5 WY COUNCIL

 
 

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87

economy and value-adding to business innovation and robustness are all aligned in one way or another to
the objectives of the White Paper.

This is why it is crucial that alongside a coordinated investment decisions, that people-centred and
employment policies are implemented. :

After significant lobbying, the Pilbara Regional Council was pleased to see that the Northern Australia
White Paper committed the Commonwealth Government to completing a Designated Area Migration
Agreement (DAMA) for the Pilbara.

Several years later, the Pilbara Regional Council has reached individual agreements with the State and
Commonwealth Government, and the only thing standing in the way of the DAMA’s success is an ability of
the State and Commonwealth Governments to reach an agreement with each other.

A Designated Area Migration Agreement is an instrument that is used only when needed, and only when all
options are exhausted. It provides businesses in the Pilbara with access to foreign workers in specific
occupations where the shortage is radically different to that of the eastern states.

Melbourne does not now, nor will it ever need, foreign workers to come to Australia to fill a barista
shortage. Alas this surplus in that profession in Victoria has not resulted in an influx of Melbournians to the
Pilbara, where significant barista shortages occur each time the mining investment and construction boom
swings through the region. With the announcement of a new construction, Pilbara workers are pouched by
the mining companies for much higher salaries, meaning local businesses with strong clientele have to
close, because of a shortage of staff.

Melbournians, and Australians more broadly, do not travel for work. So this surplus in the east and shortage
in the north continues due to a one-size-fits-all immigration policy. The DAMA is a geographically limited
457 visa, based on the Pilbara’s needs, and activated only as a last resort during construction booms that
yield very specific and very dangerous staff shortages.

The Pilbara region is also working towards the goal of a regional university. Using the ‘Geraldton University
Centre’ model, work is currently underway through a Pilbara University Centre Working Group to seek
partners for the establishment of a centre.

The potential of co-locating several universities together under the one roof offers each participant the
opportunity to expand to the region without having to cover the costs of expensive infrastructure outlays.

As long as it remains the case in a region that in order to get an education or retire you must leave, regional
inequality will remain a feature of regional Western Australia for decades.

Ensuring that key services such as a university are available in region’s like the Pilbara will contribute to the
regional human capital, further develop local skills and improve employment outcomes, especially when
combined with business attraction plans such as those within the special economic zone proposal.

Recommendation #4: That the Commonwealth Government re-engage with the State Government directly
to put the signing of a Designated Area Migration Agreement for the Pilbara a policy priority of both levels
of government.

Recommendation #5: That the Commonwealth Government provide funding to support the development
of a co-located university centre in the Pilbara.

PILBARA
Page 4 of 5 © Con i

 
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87

TOR | - L: Decentralisation and Innovation

The Pilbara Regional Council agrees in broad terms with the premise that the closer the connection to the
individual citizen receiving the service, the better the service will be delivered. This is especially true where
we see government officials living in the region they serve, or better still, being hired to serve the region
they call home. This will act to reduce inequality between regions and metropolitan centres.

Innovative co-location models for government departments are already working in the Pilbara, with ‘The
Quarter’ in Karratha housing departmental staff from agriculture and food, commerce, education, finance,
mines and petroleum, planning, transport, water, housing and land.

Recommendation #6: That the Commonwealth Government consider co-locating regional development,
infrastructure, agriculture, defence, and social services personnel in key centres such as The Quarter to
improve direct connection to the community and cooperation with State and Local Government.

Closing Remarks

| have attached our submission to the Productivity Commission's ‘transitioning regional economies’ inquiry,
which many of the above arguments come from. | also encourage the Committee to visit Western Australia
to hold a hearing here, and if possible, to visit the regions.

When the Productivity Commission held their inquiry hearing in Karratha, the Pilbara Regional Council
assisted in the logistics to ensure it was well attended and a venue could be sourced, in partnership with
the Pilbara Development Commission.

This partnership with the PDC is evidence of the beginnings of a more united plan for regional Western
Australia, and should show the Commonwealth Government that we are committed to the values of
cooperation and coordination espoused here, with or without the benefit of the Commonwealth being at
the table.

| have also attached our submission to the inquiry into developing northern Australia, which spoke to the
mechanics and benefits of utilising a special economic zone model, well-tested across the world, but yet to
be attempted in Australia.

You will find the regional local government model in Western Australia, and the Pilbara Regional Council
more specifically, to be an appropriate and positive contributor to the effort to reduce regional inequality.

Should you prefer to discuss this in person, or simply require additional information, please feel free to

contact me directly 0n

Yours faithfully

Tony Friday
Chief Executive Officer
Pilbara Regional Council

Ce Cr Lynne Craigie, Chairperson, Pilbara Regional Council
Attachment: Productivity Commission Submission - Transitioning Regional Economies; Submission - Pilbara Special Economic
Zone

Ml@~ PILBARA
Page 5 of 5 WF COUNCIL
