Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2

Submission Number: 25
Date Received: 14/02/2014

Supporting Economic Prosperity in Northern Australia
via the creation of a Pilbara Special Economic Zone
A submission from the Pilbara Regional Council

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Contents
!
OVERVIEW.......................................................................................................... 1!
WHAT IS A SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE? .............................................................. 2!
THE PILBARA ...................................................................................................... 3!
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE PROJECT NEED .......................................................... 5!
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE FRAMEWORK............................................................. 6!
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES GLOBALLY ............................................................... 8!
THE PROFILE OF A PILBARA SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE ..................................... 9!
SUCCESS FACTORS FOR A SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE ....................................... 11!
INVESTMENT INCENTIVES ................................................................................ 18!
SUCCESS OF SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES IN OTHER REGIONS .......................... 22!
WHERE TO FROM HERE? ................................................................................... 26!
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................... 27!
APPENDIX A: ECONOMIC PROFILE OF THE PILBARA ......................................... 30!

This submission to the House of Representatives Joint Select Committee on Northern
Australia has been prepared by the Chief Executive Officer of the Pilbara Regional
Council, with submission authorised by the Shire President on behalf of Council.

14 February 2014

ii

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Overview
This proposal is to for a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in the
Pilbara region in Western Australia. The key purpose of the
SEZ is to develop a sustainable, diversified economy in one of
the most economically and strategically significant regions in
Australia.

The SEZ will utilise targeted company, employee, and
development incentives to attract investment, resident
population, and industry development in a range of sectors
which will leverage the region’s existing minerals industry and
export infrastructure.

Many Australian and international businesses wish to take
advantage of the opportunities available in the Pilbara.
However, the isolation and cost structure of the region has
constrained investment and employment outside of the direct
resources sector.

Key components of the SEZ include:

For the Pilbara, the acute concentration of activity within the
resources sector has led to a high growth, but a volatile and
vulnerable economy. Economic development and diversification
through an SEZ framework will ease ongoing cost pressures,
insulate the region against the commodity cycle, and provide
greater lifestyle options and amenity.
For Australia this will lead to a more stable and competitive
resources sector. One that is better able to coexist with the
broader economy during the up-cycle, and is able to sustain
output and operations during the down-cycle.

•

Establishment of a “one-stop-shop”
development approvals within the SEZ.

for

streamlined

•

Access to temporary “incubator” office space for start-up
businesses.

•

Increased zone offset incentives reflecting the higher costs
of permanent residency in the Pilbara region.

•

An extended regional migration agreement to improve
labour access for a broader range of investments and
industries.

•

A range of business taxation and other incentives targeting
the critical barriers to investment in the Pilbara region.

The outcomes of the SEZ will be to strengthen and diversify
the Pilbara region, stabilising growth over the commodity cycle
and providing broad, ongoing employment and lifestyle
opportunities for regional Western Australia.

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

What is a Special Economic Zone?
A Special Economic Zone is a geographical region designed to
export goods and provide employment. SEZs are usually
exempt from certain national laws regarding taxes, quotas,
foreign direct investment (FDI) restrictions, labour laws and
other limiting laws in order to increase the competitiveness of
the SEZ.
SEZs are called different names including Free Trade Zones
(FTZ), Export Processing Zones (EPZ), Free Zones (FZ),
industrial parks or Industrial Estates (IE), free ports, free
economic zones, and urban enterprise zones.

Table 1). Urban enterprise zones utilise tax concessions,
infrastructure incentives, and reduced regulations to stimulate
employment and improve economic diversity in regions faced
with unique economic challenges and circumstances. Prime
examples include United States Federal Empowerment Zones,
and the United Kingdom’s and France’s Enterprise Zones. The
Pilbara has unique economic challenges.

SEZs are used extensively across the world as a means to
unlock the economic potential of regions.
SEZs are typically associated with developing economies who
promote SEZs as areas with better safety and property
protection and less restrictive labour and trade arrangements
in order to attract (particularly foreign) investment.
However, alternative forms of SEZ are increasingly being
applied
in
developed
countries
(see

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Table 1: Developed Country Special Economic Zones
Country

Existing SEZ

Canada

1 FTZ

Denmark

10 FTZs

Finland

2 FTZs

France

2 FTZs, 85 Enterprise Zones

Germany

8 FTZs

Greece

3 FTZs

Iceland

2 FTZs

Ireland

1 EPZ, 1 FTZ

Italy

4 FTZs

Japan

22 Foreign Access Zones

Malta

1 FTZ, 10 Industrial Zones

Portugal

2 FTZs

Spain

4 FTZs, 1 Freeport

Sweden

4 FTZs

Switzerland

4 FTZs

United Kingdom

7 FTZs, 24 Enterprise Zones

United States

266 Foreign Trade Zones, 30 Federal Empowerment Zones

Source: FAIS (2008), HM Government (2014), United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (2014)

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

The Pilbara
“a unique economy, founded on an abundance of natural iron ore”
Australia has a strategic role in the continued prosperity and
growth of the expanding economies of China, India and SouthEast Asia.
The Pilbara region plays a core role in this expansion, providing
45% of global iron ore exports. The region contributes 90% of
Australia’s iron ore exports and produces 85% of Australia’s
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).
The Pilbara currently contributes 17.5% of WA’s economic
activity and 2.8% of Australia’s economic activity. Regional
gross regional product (GRP) per capita is more than 6 times
the state level and more than 10 times the national level at
$690,000 per capita.

“...the Pilbara is not a short term quarry. It will sustain
major wealth generation for Australians for hundreds of
years.”
Andrew Forrest Chairman FMG, The Pilbara Plan (2008)

Growth in the region is expected to continue to be driven by
emerging market demand. GRP is forecast to increase 4.75%
per annum to 2040 (compared to 3.2% for WA and 2.9% for
Australia as a whole).
Figure 2: Pilbara Forecast GRP (2010-2040)
$45,000

Figure 1: Pilbara Region Economic Contribution

$40,000

20.0%

12.0%

$35,000

17.5%

10.0%

12.5%

$25,000

8.0%

$20,000

6.0%

$15,000

10.0%

% Growth

GRP ($m)

$30,000

15.0%

Pilbara's)Contribution)(%)

14.0%

4.0%

$10,000
7.5%

2.0%

$5,000

5.0%

$0

0.0%
2010

2.5%

Pilbara GRP ($m)

0.0%
%(of(WA
Economy

Employment

%(of(Australia
Population

2020
Pilbara GRP Growth %

2030
WA GSP Growth %

2040
AUS GDP Growth %

Note: Deloitte Access Economics Forecasts based on the Karratha (Roebourne) and Port
Hedland regions only.
Source: Deloitte Access Economics (2011), AECgroup

Source: AECgroup

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

In 2011, the total value of Pilbara minerals and petroleum
exports was $86 billion, which made up 81% of total mineral
and petroleum exports from WA and represented 5.7% of
Australia’s GDP.
Reflective of this production the Pilbara economy is strongly
dominated by the mining sector, providing 86% of GRP
equating to $34.3 billion dollars, 40.6% of total jobs and
contributes 94% of the Total Value Add for the Pilbara region.
The lack of economic diversity within the Pilbara economy is
extreme, with minimal business services and manufacturing
sectors. This over and under specialisation in economic activity
requires an SEZ framework which will accelerate the Pilbara’s
economic development and diversify its economic base.

Proportion(of(Total(Value(Add((%)

To support population and industry growth, the region has
invested (leveraging a range of public and private
partnerships) in a range of community and social assets to
support regional growth. The missing link in order to unleash
the true potential of the Pilbara region is a policy framework to
stimulate investment and attract a permanent population with
the skill sets to sustain economic development over the
commodity
cycle.

5%
30%

80%

46%
5%

60%

12%
8%

94%

“The long term sustainability of the Pilbara Region will be
dependent on local employment in a diversified economy.
Even though the resources sector is likely to underpin the
region’s productivity there is a need to develop a local
economy that is not totally reliant on commodity process.”
Regional Development Australia (2012a)

Figure 3: Proportion of Total Value Add (2011-12)
100%

The Pilbara already enjoys close trade relationships with Asia
(accounting for around 90% of WA merchandise exports over
the year ending November 2013). The establishment of a
Pilbara SEZ would drive economic development and growth of
the Pilbara’s industrial base, reducing the economy’s reliance
on resource extraction by supporting the development of
downstream mining activities and other high value-adding
industries.

40%
23%
53%
20%
23%
0%
Pilbara
Resources*

AECgroup

WA
Business=Services

Manufacturing

Australia
Remainder

Source:

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Special Economic Zone Need
Figure 4: Pilbara Region Cost Factor Index (Perth = 1)

“unlocking the potential of the Pilbara”
The strength and bias of
industries has resulted in a
This had made the Pilbara
Australia but also one of the

the Pilbara resource sector and related
significant lack of economic diversification.
Region one of the strongest economies in
most concentrated.

The scale of resources activity has created significant business
opportunities for upstream and downstream industries.
Furthermore, broad population growth and high disposable
incomes offer numerous opportunities for broader industry
sectors.
However, the isolation of the region and the dominance and
cyclical nature of the resource sector have thus far constrained
and crowded out broader investment. High establishment and
operating costs (see Figure 4) combined with volatile economic
conditions continue to hold back broad based economic
development in the Pilbara.
For the region to become a sustainable diversified economy,
new and alternative industries must be established off the back
of the region’s competitive advantages.
Table 2: Regional Competitive Advantages and Constraints
Competitive Advantages

Regional Constraints

• An industrial backbone (iron ore,
other minerals, oil, and gas)
• Abundant land
• Renewable energy potential
• Proximity to Asian markets
• Existing transport network
infrastructure (rail, road and ports)
• Growing population base

• Skilled labour supply
• High establishment and operating
costs
• Volatile, cyclical economy
• Lack of critical population mass
• Lack of local services

Source: AECgroup

Rent - Accommodation
Rent - Industrial
Car Hire
Median Individual Weekly Income

Rent - Commerical
Truck Hire
House Prices
Construction
Rent - Retail
Water
Petrol
Diesel
Electricity SMEs
Electricity Large Businesses
0

1

2

3

4

Cost Index (Perth =1)

Note; Pilbara region estimate based on the median outcome for Karratha, Port Hedland,
Onslow, and Newman.
Source: RDA (2013)

Establishing an appropriate investment environment through
the proposed SEZ framework will provide private sector
investors with the confidence, commercial viability, physical
infrastructure, labour, and population base to capitalise on the
broad economic potential of the Pilbara region.

6

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Special Economic Zone Framework
Around the world, Special Economic Zones have been used to
unlock the potential of regions. By attracting investment that
diversifies and increases employment SEZs enable the
development of new technologies, strengthen the economic
base and increase entrepreneurial and technical capacities.
Australia is one of the few developed economies not to have
enthusiastically embraced this approach.
The Northern Australia proposal covering the areas of Australia
north of the Tropic of Capricorn spanning Western Australia,
Northern Territory and Queensland was initially put forward by
the Australians for Northern Development & Economic Vision
(ANDEV, 2014). The proposal stated that the capitalisation of
opportunities would require a strong policy platform for the
sustainable long term development of Northern Australia.
Many of the suggested mechanisms (not badged as a SEZ
framework) were included in the Coalition’s Policy Document
“2030 Vision for Developing Northern Australia” (2013).
Northern Australia White Paper Policy Option #4:
“Looking to build on existing key urban zones – such as
Darwin, Cairns, Townsville and Karratha – with the aim of
substantially increasing the population in these areas. To
this end, the efficacy and targeting of current relocation
incentives and personal and business tax incentives could be
reviewed.”

in comparison with general economic laws of the country.
Due to the new economic environment created, investors
can benefit not only from the wide range of business
opportunities, but also from tax and investment incentives,
access to highly qualified labour force, as well as natural and
energy resources. An SEZ across the Pilbara will ensure the
necessary infrastructure and services for manufacturing and
industry, attract additional diversified investment, diversify
and increase employment, incentivise the development of
new technologies, diversify the economic base, and enhance
entrepreneurial and technical capacities.
The overarching purpose of an SEZ for the Pilbara is to
maximise economic growth and contribute to the social
sustainability of the region, thus, assisting with the
achievement of the Pilbara Cities Vision.”
Regional Development Australia (2012b)
Utilising a SEZ framework enables policy to be tailored to the
specific and unique needs of the Pilbara region without
implementing policies which are inappropriate for the broader
WA and Australian economies.
Core aims of the Pilbara SEZ are to:
•

Build the Pilbara’s capacity to support next wave of growth.

•

Develop broad and viable employment options for resource
employee’s partners and families, and the local indigenous
population.

•

Keep a greater share of the wealth produced by the Pilbara
within the region and within Australia.

•

Develop an efficient regional cost structure.

•

Spike a local mining services cluster which will enable long
term
efficiencies.

The Coalition’s 2030 Vision for Developing Northern Australia (2013)

The promotion of SEZs within Australia is not a new idea. The
Pilbara Report (2012) recommended the creation of a SEZ to
reduce costs and increase investments in the non-resources
sector.

“SEZs are territories with more liberal economic legislation

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

The conceptual framework for using the Pilbara SEZ to overcome the region’s key economic constraints is provided in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Pilbara SEZ Framework

Economic'
Constraints

Labour'Supply

Establishment'and'
Operating'Costs

Volatile,'Cyclical'
Economy

Critical'Population'
Mass

Target'SEZ'Policy

Outcomes'for'the'Pilbara

Outcomes'for'Australia

• Reduced'cost'of'operations''
• Increased'investment'in'the'nonAresources'
sector
• Improved'services'/'amenity''
• Increased'economic'diversity'and'stability
• Improved'skills'base
• Broader'business'opportunities'for'
population'driven'sectors
• Broader'employment'opportunities'for'
families,'indigenous

• Increased'employment,'economic'
opportunities
• More'competitive,'stable'resources'
sector

• Extended'regional'Skilled'
migration'agreement
• Increased'Zone'Tax'Offset'for'
permanent'residents

• Reduced'company'taxation,'
transfer'duty,'and'payroll'tax
• “OneAstopAshop”'for'streamlined'
development'approval
• Temporary'“incubator”'office'
space'for'business'start'ups

• Reduced'company'taxation,'
transfer'duty,'and'payroll'tax

• Extended'regional'Skilled'
migration'agreement
• Increased'Zone'Tax'Offset'for'
permanent'residents

Source: AECgroup

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Special Economic Zones Globally
There has been an explosion of SEZs in developing countries
since 1975 with the most rapid expansion taking place in the
last 20 years. In 2006, 130 countries operated 3,500 zones
and employed roughly 66 million people around the globe, with
China alone employing 60 percent of all workers (Boyenge,
2007).

The rapid growth of Export Processing Zones (a type of SEZ)
programs around the world over the last two decades, and
their success in contributing to export-led growth in regions
like East Asia, is due in part to an unprecedented globalization
of trade and investment that took place since the 1970s and
accelerated during the 1990s and 2000s, which saw trade grow
85 percent faster than GDP between 1983 and 2008.

Around the world…
SEZs have had a very significant contribution to national employment in
China. Between 2006 and 2007, total employment of China’s SEZ grew from
2% of national employment to more than 4%. In 2006, all SEZ’s
accounted for a combined 11.1 percent of China’s total GDP and 29.8
percent of exports (China Knowledge Online 2009). The greatest number of
jobs from SEZ have been created in China, with some 30 million employed
in the SEZ sector (ILO, 2014).

Table 2: SEZ Exports as a Percentage of Total Exports
2000

2006

Change (%)

Madagascar

38%

80%

42

Maldives

13%

48%

35

Colombia

9%

40%

31

Bangladesh

60%

76%

16

Amongst zones that have been in operation for five or more years, the
median zone in Asian countries has 10,500 employees, while in Latin
America the median zone has just over 3,500 employees (Jenkins et al
1998).

Kenya

80%

87%

7

Sri Lanka

33%

38%

5

Costa Rica

50%

52%

2

In Bangladesh, total SEZ employment grew from mere 624 in 1983 when
the first zone was established in Chittagong, to over 144,000 by 2003–4
(Aggarwal 2006).

Cameroon

32%

33%

1

Malaysia

83%

83%

0

Gabon

80%

80%

0

Macao SAR, China

80%

80%

0

Zimbabwe

80%

80%

0

Vietnam

80%

80%

0

Dominican Rep.

80%

80%

0

In Central America, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Honduras have established
successful zones. Between 1991 and 1996, employment in Costa Rica
zones increased more than 7 per cent per annum. Employment in
Honduras zones increased more than 40 per cent per year between 1990
and 1996. SEZ employment accounted for almost 20 per cent of
industrial employment in 1995 in Nicaragua (Jenkins et al 1998).

Morocco

61%

61%

0

Haiti

50%

50%

0

Philippines

87%

60%

-27

Tunisia

80%

52%

-28

Mexico

80%

47%

-33

Through SEZ, the Dominican Republic created more than 100,000
manufacturing jobs and shifted away from reliance on agriculture. At
its peak, the SEZ’s contributed 7.5 percent of total GDP and were responsible
for 90 percent of the country’s exports.

Mauritius

77%

42%

-35

Mauritius (Africa) introduced its SEZ programme in 1970, reducing official
unemployment from 23 per cent in 1979 to 2 per cent in the early
1990s (before it increased in recent years to 8 per cent in 2000) as the
country’s SEZs generated 88,000 new jobs.

Country

Source: Boyenge (2003, 2007)

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Profile of a Pilbara Special Economic Zone
It is envisioned that the Pilbara SEZ will encompass the Pilbara
region in it’s entirely, encompassing the local government
areas of:
•
•
•
•

Ashburton.
East Pilbara.
Roebourne.
Port Hedland.

Incentives apply equally across the zone. However, key areas
across the SEZ will be targeted for “one-stop-shop”
development approval streamlining. This will allow for preapproval for defined activity types and reduce the complexity
of approval processing.
Likewise incubator temporary office space incentives will be
offered based on strategic location and existing industry
clusters.
Figure 1.6: Pilbara SEZ

Target Sectors
The objective of the Pilbara SEZ will be to create a competitive
operating environment that will assist in the attraction and
retention of national and international businesses to the Pilbara
region. Ultimately new business and investment will contribute
to the diversification of the economic base towards a robust
and stable Pilbara economy.
The focus of a Pilbara SEZ is not on the future development of
the resource extraction sector but diversification of industry.
Expanding on the region’s core supply chain will provide the
scale and commercial viability to generate the levels of
investment required to drive economic development.
However, the SEZ will target investment from a broad range of
industry sectors aimed at increasing the diversity, stability,
and liveability of the Pilbara region.
Table 3: SEZ Target Industries
Resource Supply Chain Targets

Pilbara'Region

•
•
•
•
•
•

Equipment hire
Equipment servicing
Repair and maintenance facilities
Conveyor systems
Minerals processing
Transport and logistics

Industry Diversification Targets
•
•
•
•
•

Tourism and hospitality
Distribution and retail
Professional and social services
Education and training
Information technology

Source: AECgroup

The Pilbara has evolved into the economic powerhouse of
Australia and is on the threshold of another period of
expansion.”
Pilbara Development Commission (2013)
Source: Pilbara Regional Council (Undated), AECgroup

9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Investment Incentives
With the establishment of the Pilbara Special Economic Zone
the SEZ would be seeking implementation of a number of tax
and other investment incentives aimed at increasing the
competitive advantage of the Pilbara as an attractive region to
invest by businesses.

o
o
o
•

Removal of Payroll Tax for employment of permanent
residents within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Removal of Transfer Duty on land acquired for approved
new plant or residential dwelling construction within the
Pilbara SEZ.

•

50% reduction in Land Tax for approved land productively
utilised within the Pilbara SEZ.

Potential investment incentives considered appropriate for the
Pilbara SEZ include:
•

Reduction in Company Tax to 20% for approved companies
based and operating within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Removal of Fringe Benefits Tax on housing subsidies paid
to a permanent residential workforce within the Pilbara
SEZ.

•

Streamlined
“one-stop-shop”
development
processing within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Provision of subsidised temporary office space for business
start-ups in key locations within the SEZ.

•

Increase in the Personal Income Tax Zone Offset to
$5,000-$8,000 for permanent residents within the Pilbara
SEZ.

•

Extension of the regional skilled labour migration
agreement to encompass a broader range of industries,
including:
o Manufacturing.
o Hospitality.

approval

Public administration.
Education and training.
Professional and semi-skilled service sectors.

SEZ Management
A SEZ Authority developed with responsibility for the
development and operations of the SEZ and to monitor
performance of firms in relation to various regulatory
provisions.
It will establish vertically integrated funding for assisting both
domestic and international investment, as well as an
Infrastructure Fund to develop the balance of lands and
utilities.
The SEZ Authority needs adequate autonomy to control all
aspects of administration, financing, regulation compliance and
policy making, intrinsic to the SEZ.

10

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Success Factors for a Special Economic Zone
“the Pilbara is ready…”
The criteria for the development of a successful SEZ program
are considered to be:
•

Industry Enablers: Provision
services to promote connection.

of

infrastructure

•

Business Enablers: Provision of a regulatory environment
that promotes efficient business transactions.

•

Investment Incentives: Provision of an economic
environment that promotes investment by the private
sector.

Figure 7: Industry Enablers

and

Over the last 5 years, the Pilbara region has been on a journey
of preparedness for the future. State and local agencies have
been working across the key focus areas of infrastructure
coordination, land availability and development, community
projects and engagement to build the platform for future
growth. This has resulted in positioning of the region to enable
industry investment and diversification within an SEZ
environment.

Transport$
Infrastructure$

SEZ$
Labour$
Force$

U3li3es$

Land$
Living$
Condi3ons$

Industry Enablers
Industry enablers as outlined in Figure 7 consist of the
underlying supporting infrastructure that support the
establishment of a business.

Industry$
Linkages$

Market$
Access$

Source: AECgroup

Economic diversification is dependent on the attraction of a
workforce with appropriate skills, which in turn, is limited by
available living environments (housing) and community
services.

11

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Figure 9: Pilbara Region Employment by Occupation (PoW,
2011)

Labour Force
In June 2013 the Pilbara region registered a labour force of
29,328 persons and an unemployment rate of 3.6% (compared
to 4.4% for WA and 5.4% for Australia as a whole).

6.8%

Despite rises in unemployment around the commodity cycle,
the region has remained at close to full employment over the
post-global financial crisis (GFC) period.

4.1%

2.3%
Technicians & Trades Workers

31.4%

8.5%

Machinery Operators & Drivers
Labourers

Figure 8: Pilbara Labour Force and Unemployment

Professionals

35,000

6.0%

Clerical & Administrative Workers
11.8%

30,000

4.0%

20,000
3.0%
15,000
2.0%

10,000
1.0%

5,000

Pilbara Labour Force
WA Unemployment Rate

Jun-13

Mar-13

Dec-12

Jun-12

Sep-12

Mar-12

Dec-11

Jun-11

Sep-11

Mar-11

Dec-10

Jun-10

Sep-10

Mar-10

Dec-09

Jun-09

Sep-09

Mar-09

Dec-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

Mar-08

Dec-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

0.0%
Mar-07

0

Pilbara Unemployment Rate
Australia Unemployment Rate

Unemployment Rate (%)

25,000

Labour Force (No.)

Managers

5.0%

Community & Personal Service
Workers
Sales Workers

12.8%
22.3%

Source: ABS (2012)

Securing an available and appropriately skilled labour force has
been one of the major constraints to broader economic
development in the Pilbara region.
Industries outside of resources have struggled to compete with
the high wages offered by the resources sector, with average
incomes in the Pilbara 1.7 times the national average (see
Figure 10). The shift to FIFO and DIDO operations within the
resources sector has also reduced the availability of labour
through partners and mature aged children.

Source: DEEWR (2013)

The regional workforce is heavily skewed towards trade and
semi-skilled labour, with technicians & trade workers and
machinery operators & drivers accounting for nearly 54% of
occupations in the region.

12

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Figure 10: Average Weekly Individual Income (PoW, 2011)
Average Individual Income ($/Week)

$2,000.0

$1,800.0

$1,758.3

Using multipliers provided by Dr Don Burnside, Principle Natural Resources
Scientist URS, a resident population increase of 40,000 needs the following
additional resources:
•

582 child care places

•

83 child care workers

•

2730 primary school places

•

195 primary school staff

•

496 secondary school places

$800.0

•

62 secondary school staff

$600.0

•

131 police

$400.0

•

34 doctors

•

373 nurses

$1,600.0
$1,400.0
$1,117.0

$1,200.0
$1,000.0

$1,017.1

$200.0
$0.0
Pilbara

WA

Aus

Source: ABS (2012)

The Pilbara region is prepared for the increase in resident
workforce. By 2035, it is planned for the region to have a
resident population of more than 140,000. The Pilbara Cities
vision is for the cities of Karratha and Port Hedland to each
have a population of 50,000. The town of Newman will become
a sub-regional centre with a population of 15,000 in addition to
the major towns of Tom Price, Onslow and Wickham.
The Pilbara SEZ will counter the region’s labour shortage
through an extended regional labour migrant agreement
and an increased zone tax offset for permanent residents.

Living Conditions (Including Housing and
Community Services)
The current and forecast growth in residential population will
require additional housing and community services. This need
has been recognised by the region as outlined in the Future
Development of the Pilbara presentation by the PDC and
Pilbara Cities (June 2013).

An increase of 40,000 people means that 6,747 houses are need for families,
12,013 for single and couples equating to 18,760 dwellings in total by 2020.
Pilbara Development Commission (2013).

State and local agencies have delivered a number of projects
that improve the social conditions such as:
•

Nickol Bay Hospital Project: $10 million of Royalties for
Regions funding.

•

Medical Practitioner Housing Project (Port Hedland):
Construction of 9 to 10 dwellings to house GP’s working
locally in Port Hedland.

•

Karratha Education, Leisure and Training Precinct (KELT):
$20.3 million to assist with funding the building of a
community and sporting precinct, together with the second
stage of the Karratha Senior High School project.

•

South Hedland Senior High School Upgrade: A $17.35
million project funded by $13.35 million from the Royalties
to Regions fund.

•

JD Hardie Centre (South Hedland Youth Precinct): The JD
Hardie Centre redevelopment created an expanded and
multifunctional youth precinct.

•

Wangankara Stadium: A $34.1 million project funded by
$11.1 million from the Royalties to Regions fund. Transport
Infrastructure.

13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

The region is developing social infrastructure to support a
growing population.
The Pilbara SEZ will address the cost and regulatory
barriers enabling private sector services to the region to
grow.

Transport Infrastructure
The Pilbara transport network has been developed to support
the extraction and export of product from resource
developments. The core road network connects the major
coastal towns and inland towns, supported by local and site
road networks. The region has a large number of private rail
networks operated by the resource sector. The network is
focused on the export of iron ore from the inland mines to the
region’s ports: Port Hedland (East Pilbara), Dampier, Cape
Lambert and Anketell (West Pilbara) Marine. These ports
provide the link to international markets, and are dominated
by the export trade of commodities such as iron ore, liquid
natural gas and solar salt.
The Pilbara is serviced by four public airports (Karratha, Port
Hedland, Newman, and Paraburdoo), and numerous other
airstrips operated by the resource sector and private
operators. Existing infrastructure is in place to provide support
for imports and exports.
The Pilbara SEZ will enable this infrastructure to be
utilised to its full potential by a broad range of industry
sectors.

Land
Although a vast area, access to commercial land within the
Pilbara has previously been restrained or underdeveloped.
The state and local government agencies have commenced
improving access to land and promote revitalisation of existing
commercial centres.
Key projects are:
•

South Hedland Town Centre Revitalisation: $23 million
redevelopment plan to provide 600 townhouses and
apartments, and additional commercial and retail space.

•

Karratha CBD Redevelopment: Partnership with Landcorp
to redevelop the Karratha CBD with funding support of
$131 million from Royalties for Regions.

•

Lazy Lands: Infill program to support land release in town
centres based on repackaging land for residential purposes.

The Pilbara SEZ will address regulatory barriers enabling
private sector access to land to support development of
industry clusters.

Utilities
Adequate and efficient infrastructure for water, waste water,
energy, waste is critical for growth.
The Pilbara Planning and Infrastructure Framework (Planning
WA, 2012) has mapped the current and future provision
requirements, and identified the priority infrastructure projects
which will enable the Pilbara to support ongoing industry
growth.
The Pilbara SEZ will prompt further investment in
infrastructure to be utilised to its full potential by a broad
range of industry sectors.

14

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Table 4: Pilbara Infrastructure Priorities to 2015
Infrastructure

Priorities

Water

• Investigate the potential for expansion of Bungaroo borefield
or development of other nearby groundwater resources
• Investigate construction of a desalination plant to service
Karratha City (Karratha/Dampier)
• Encourage strategies that promote responsible consumption
of water by industry and consumers
• Upgrade existing water sources- Yule and de Grey borefieldsto service Port Hedland
• Identify a new water source - Cane River borefields, Lower
Robe aquifer or an alternative - to service Onslow
• Identify water re-use options and opportunities
• Use fit-for-purpose options for dust suppression
• Improve planning for water services across the region

Waste Water

• Upgrade Karratha Waste Water Treatment Plant
• Upgrade Port Hedland deep sewerage scheme
• Decommission the Port Hedland Wastewater Treatment Plant
and augment capacity at the South Hedland Wastewater
Treatment Plant
• Identify opportunities for reuse of treated waste water
• Provide waste water services to the region's aboriginal
communities

Energy

•
•
•
•

Provide new power transmission at Port Hedland
Provide new power generation and transmission at Karratha
Expand power generation at Onlsow
Investigate renewable energy options

Waste Management

• Develop a system of townsite transfer stations
• Investigate recycling options in service hubs
• Continue to monitor and identify new or upgrade existing
waste management facilities
• Promote implementation of improved waste management
practices in aboriginal communities

Telecommunications

• Augment mobile phone coverage - telecommunication
companies
• Roll out of National Broadband Network in the Pilbara

Industry Linkages
As the Pilbara economy is dominated by the resource sector,
the proportion of other industry sectors is well below state and
national benchmarks.
Nevertheless there are a number of developing supply chain
and supporting industry segments already established which
can be built upon through the Pilbara SEZ.
Key sectors of note include:
•

Accommodation and food services: (5.1% of Pilbara
employment): While the sector services the resources
industry to a significant extent, accommodation and food
services also represents an established and growing
tourism industry.

•

Administrative and support services: (3.2% of Pilbara
employment): The Pilbara possesses an established
administrative and support sector servicing the resources
industry.

•

Education and training: (3.0% of Pilbara employment):
Employment levels are well below state and national levels
(approximately 8.0%) indicating unmet demand for
education and training services.

•

Manufacturing:
(3.0%
of
Pilbara
employment):
Significant opportunities exist to expand the region’s
manufacturing industry through the Pilbara SEZ.

Source: Planning WA (2012)

15

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Figure 11: Employment by Industry Benchmarks (PoW, 2011)
Accommodation and food services

Market Access
Australia and the Pilbara holds a strategic role in the continued
economic prosperity and growth of Asia’s key economies as a
major supplier of energy and other raw materials.

Administrative and support services
Education and training
Manufacturing

Figure 12: Pilbara SEZ Strategic Location

Health care and social assistance
Retail trade
Professional, scientific and technical services

Public administration and safety
Other services
Rental, hiring and real estate services
Wholesale trade
Electricity, gas, water and waste services
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Financial and insurance services

AU

WA

Pilbara

Arts and recreation services
Information media and telecommunications
0.0% 2.0% 4.0% 6.0% 8.0% 10.0% 12.0% 14.0%
Proportion of Total Employment

Note: Excludes mining, construction, and transport, postal and warehousing industries.
Source: ABS (2012)

Although underdeveloped, the Pilbara region has a range of
supply chain and support industries which the Pilbara SEZ
will build and expand upon.

Source: AECgroup

As household incomes grow and emerging economies mature
these trading partners are also becoming significant markets
for higher value agricultural produce, specialised manufactured
goods and professional services. The Pilbara is well positioned
to interact with the growing Asian economies.
The Pilbara SEZ will enable industry to fully capture the
opportunities presented by emerging market demand.

16

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Business Enablers
The World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index
(GCI) 2013-14 provides significant insight into the Australian
business enabling environment.
Australia currently ranks 21st out of 148 countries across all
indicators with a score of 5.1 out of 7. Australia’s competitive
position has remained largely static over the past three years.
Australia’s strengths centre around an educated workforce and
a stable legal, financial, and macroeconomic environment.
Australia’s competitive weaknesses are identified as over
taxation and regulation, and an inefficient and inflexible labour
market (see Table 5).
Table 5: Australian
Indicators, 2013)
Business Enabler
Strengths
Inflation, annual %
change
Legal rights index
No. of days to start a
business
Efficacy of corporate
boards
Quality of scientific
research institutions
Prevalence of foreign
ownership

Competitiveness

Rank
(out of
148)
1
1
2
7
8
8

Soundness of banks

9

Country credit rating

10

Tertiary education
enrolment (gross %)
Firm-level technology
absorption

11
14

Rankings

Business Enabler
Weaknesses
Business impact of rules
on FDI
Trade tariffs (% duty)
Wastefulness of
government spending
Effect of taxation on
incentives to invest
Total tax rate (%
profits)
Pay and productivity
Burden of government
regulation
Flexibility of wage
determination
Hiring and firing
practices
Imports as a percentage
of GDP

(Selected

The impact of these competitive weaknesses is particularly
acute for the Pilbara due to its isolation and high cost
structure.
Outside of the resources sector businesses need a more
appropriate investment environment to overcome the costs of
isolation and competition with the resources sector.
The SEZ framework will enable the Pilbara region to address
core competitive weaknesses.
Through broader labour
market flexibility and decreased regulatory and tax burdens,
the Pilbara region will be able to capitalise on its extensive
economic opportunities.
The stable legal, financial, and macroeconomic environment
provided by Australia combined with the existing resource
wealth of the region will attract world class investment and
drive long-term sustainable economic growth.

Rank
(out of
148)
41
53
56
80
109
113
128
135
137
140

Source: World Economic Forum (2013)

17

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Investment Incentives
With the establishment of the Pilbara Special Economic Zone
the SEZ would be seeking implementation of a number of tax
and other investment incentives aimed at increasing the
competitive advantage of the Pilbara as an attractive region to
invest by businesses.
Potential investment incentives considered appropriate for the
Pilbara SEZ include:
•

Reduction in Company Taxn to 20% for approved
companies based and operating within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Removal of Fringe Benefits Tax on housing subsidies paid
to a permanent residential workforce within the Pilbara
SEZ.

•

Increase in the Personal Income Tax Zone Offset to
$5,000-$8,000 for permanent residents within the Pilbara
SEZ.

•

Extension of the regional skilled labour migration
agreement to encompass a broader range of industries,
including:
o Manufacturing.
o Hospitality.
o Public administration.
o Education and training.
o Professional and semi-skilled service sectors.

•

Removal of Payroll Tax for employment of permanent
residents within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Removal of Transfer Duty on land acquired for approved
new plant or residential dwelling construction within the
Pilbara SEZ.

•

50% reduction in Land Tax for approved land productively
utilised within the Pilbara SEZ.

•

Provision of temporary “incubator” office space for start-up
businesses.

Streamlined “one-stop-shop” development approval processing
within the Pilbara SEZ.
The following sections consider each of these proposed
incentives in greater detail.

Commonwealth Government Incentives
Company Tax
Australian resident companies are subject to company tax, at a
rate set by the Australian Government. A non-resident
company is taxed on its Australian source income at the same
rate as a resident company. Taxable income and the tax rate
may vary under limited circumstances, such as industry or
business structure. The current company tax rate is 30% of
company income with deductions allowed for operational
expenditure.
Analysis:
The current rate of company tax reduces the incentive to
invest in the Pilbara region particularly for foreign investors.
A significant reduction in taxation is required to offset the
isolation and cost of operations in the Pilbara.
Recommendation:
Reduction in company taxation to 20% for approved
companies based and operating within the Pilbara SEZ.

18

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Fringe Benefits Tax

Personal Income Tax Zone Offset

Fringe benefits are benefits paid to an employee (or associate)
in respect of employment, such as a car, car parking, low
interest loan and payments of private expenses. FBT is the tax
payable on the provision of these benefits. FBT is separate
from income tax and is calculated on the taxable value of the
various benefits provided. The current rate of FBT is 46.5% of
the benefit value.

The Personal Income Tax Zone Offset is designed to offset the
cost of living in remote areas and is available to those who
have lived or worked in a remote area for 183 days or more in
given tax year. The tax offset is applied in three zones – Zone
A, Zone B and special areas within each zone. The Pilbara is
currently classified as remote (Zone A).

Analysis:

The entitlement amount varies depending on the relevant
zone:
Table 6: Zone Tax Offsets

The current FBT system generates a direct disincentive for
companies to hire permanent residents and encouraging Flyin/Fly Out and Drive in/Drive Out operations (House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Regional Australia,
2013).

Circumstance

Recommendation:

Source: ETAX Accountants (2013)

Removal of FBT on housing subsidies paid to a permanent
residential workforce within the Pilbara SEZ.

Analysis:

Single
Dependant spouse or relative

Zone B

Special
Zone

$338

$57

$1,173

$1,516

$528

$2,351

Zone A

The current Personal Income Tax Zone Offset does not
adequately reflect the cost of living in the Pilbara region.
Furthermore the 183 day threshold enables a significant
proportion of FIFO workers to claim the offset without
incurring the increased cost of living within the region (as
living expenses are covered by the employer).
Recommendation:
Increase the Personal Income Tax Zone Tax Offset for
permanent residents within the Pilbara SEZ to $5,000 for
single persons and $8,000 for persons with a dependant
spouse or relative.

19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Regional Labour Migration Agreement
Regional Migration Agreements (RMAs) are an agreement
between the Australian Government and a state or territory
government, local council, or another local stakeholder
allowing employers to sponsor foreign workers in a broader
range of occupations than allowed standard skilled migration
programmes.
RMAs specify the occupations, numbers and visa requirements
for the sponsorship of workers from outside Australia to certain
regional locations.
The agreements are specifically designed to facilitate increased
labour flows to regional areas experiencing acute labour
shortages, in particular, regions that are isolated from large
populations and do not have Australian skills and labour
available (Department of Immigration and Border Protection,
2014).
Analysis:
The Pilbara RMA is an important and necessary tool in
addressing the region’s skills shortage.
However the agreement fails to address the needs of broader
industry beyond the resources sector.

State Government Incentives
Payroll Tax
Payroll Tax is a state tax on the wages paid to employees. It is
calculated on the amount of wages paid per month and must
be paid if total Australian wages exceed the exemption
threshold in the relevant state or territory. Payroll Tax in
Western Australia is 5.5% of the value of wages paid for
companies that pay wages above the value of $750,000.
Analysis:
Payroll Tax generates a significant disincentive for larger
companies to employ additional workers.
The tax directly reduces employment and economic
development outcomes within the Pilbara region. High
operating costs in the region further reduce the capacity for
industries outside of resources to employ staff.
Recommendation:
Removal of Payroll Tax for employment of permanent
residents within the Pilbara SEZ.

Recommendation:
Extension of the RMA to facilitate the needs to broader SEZ
target industries.

20

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Land Tax

Transfer Duty

Land Tax is an annual tax which is based on the aggregated
taxable value of all land owned (excluding exempt land) at
midnight on 30 June before the year of assessment.
Current Land Tax rates are provided in the tables below:

Transfer Duty applies to transactions over dutiable property
(most commonly land, rights, and business assets) in Western
Australia. The general rate of duty applies to most dutiable
transactions not relating to residential land, and is assessed on
the dutiable value of the transaction:

Table 7: WA Land Tax Rates (2013-14)
Table 8: WA General Rate of Transfer Duty (2013-14)

Land Value

Rates

$0-$300,000

Nil

Dutiable Value

Rates

$300,001-$1,000,000

0.10 cents for each $1 in excess of $300,0000

$0-$80,000

$1.90 per $100 or part thereof

$1,000,001-$2,200,000

$700 + 0.53 cents for each $1 in excess of
$1,000,000

$80,001-$100,000

$1,520 + $2.85 per $100 or part thereof above
$80,000

$2,200,001-$5,500,000

$7,060 + 1.37 cents for each 1$ in excess of
$2,200,000

$100,001-$250,000

$2,090 + $3.80 per $100 or part thereof above
$100,000

$5,500,001-$11,000,000

$52,270 +1.64 cents for each $1 in excess of
$5,500,000

$250,000-$500,000

$7,790 + $4.75 per $100 or part thereof above
$250,000

$11,000,001 and upwards

$142,470 +2.43 cents for each $1 in excess of
$11,000,000

$500,001 and upwards

$19,665 + $5.15 per $100 or par thereof above
$500,000

WA Department of Finance (2013)

Source: WA Department of Finance (2013)

Analysis:

Analysis:

Land Tax directly reduces the incentive to acquire and
develop land holdings within the Pilbara.

Transfer Duty directly reduces the incentive to acquire and
develop land and business assets in the Pilbara.

Recommendation:

Recommendation:

50% reduction in Land Tax for approved land productively
utilised within the Pilbara SEZ.

Removal of Transfer Duty on property acquired for approved
new plant and residential dwelling construction within the
Pilbara SEZ.

21

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Success of Special Economic Zones in Other Regions
UK Enterprise Zones
There are currently 24 Enterprise Zones across England
providing a range of incentives for businesses looking to start
up or expand their operations. The UK Government began
establishing Enterprise Zones in 2011, targeting stressed areas
which also possess significant economic potential. The
Enterprise Zones seek to address the key barriers companies
face in the start-up phase of operations (United Kingdom
Department for Communities and Local Government, 2011).
These Enterprise Zones offer companies establishing or
expanding operations in the area:
•

Simplified planning procedures for companies (automatic
planning permission for specified types of development).

•

Business rates discounts (worth up to an equivalent
$500,000 AUD per business over a five year period).

Table 9: UK Enterprise Zones
Factor

Description

Established

2011

Locations

24 across the United Kingdom

Incentives offered

• Up to 100% Business Rates relief for 5-years.
• Enhanced Capital Allowances for investment in
plant and machinery
• Lease payment holidays
• Low-rent incubator units
• Development funding
• Automatic planning permission for specified
types of development
• Business-ready infrastructure (broadband
internet, highway, rail, air, and port access)

Investment to date

Approximately $1 billion AUD with 4,600 local jobs
created

an equivalent of almost $1 billion AUD in private sector
investment (United Kingdom Department for Communities and
Local Government, 2013).
Case Study: Great Yarmouth & Lowestoft Enterprise Zone
Location: East coast in Norfolk and Suffolk, England.
Area covered by Zone: 1.21 square kilometres.
Target Industries: Energy, Business Services, Construction
(including built environment) and Logistics.
The Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone is built around the
region’s local strengths in the energy sector (specifically renewables,
oil and gas exploration and extraction, and nuclear). Made up of six
sites, the zone provides an opportunity for businesses to capitalise on
the area’s leading position in the energy sector and its supply chain.
Set up in late 2011, the zone now hosts a wide range of global and
world leading companies which service the offshore oil, gas and wind
industries.
Energy related businesses looking to set up or expand in the Great
Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone benefit specifically from
simplified planning (or abolishing planning approval completely),
extensive export and industry infrastructure, and significant reductions
in business rates. Global service provider for the offshore oil and gas
industry, Diesel Power Solutions, recently moved to the zone doubling
the size of its operations and saving around $100,000 AUD over first
five years in business costs (NewAnglia, 2014).
The Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone aims to attract 80
businesses to the Zone by 2015. The investment will create over
2,000 new jobs and an estimated $95 billion AUD in capital
expenditure invested over the next 20 years.

Source: HM Government (2014)

By November 2013, Enterprise Zones in England had created
around 4,600 local jobs, attracted 180 businesses and secured

22

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

United States Empowerment Zones
A federal initiative known as Empowerment Zones began being
implemented throughout the United States of America in the
1990s. The purpose of these zones were to facilitate job
creation and generate economic growth by promoting local
business opportunities. Designated areas were established
around distressed communities which were characterised by
deep poverty and/or high emigration. Businesses within the
zones were supported through a combination of Federal
grants, tax incentives and various other benefits.

The unique Empowerment Zone initiative required that zones
to be established from bottom-up strategic plans, devised
through each community’s vision for economic revitalization
and job creation. By 2005, more than 3,575 neighbourhoodbased projects and programs had been developed and Federal
grants and tax incentives of $1.5 billion AUD were estimated to
have leveraged over $20 billion AUD in additional public and
private sector investments.
Case study: Cumberland Empowerment Zone
Location: Cumberland County, New Jersey.

Table 10: United States Empowerment Zones

Area covered by Zone: approximately 10.4 square kilometres.

Factor

Description

Established

1993

Locations

30 across the United States

Target Industries: Accommodation and Food Service, Health Care
and Social Assistance, Transportation and Warehousing, Construction
and Wholesale Trade.

Incentives offered

• Annual tax credit of up to US$3,000 for
employees who live and work in an EZ
• Tax credit of up to US$2,400 for each new
employee aged 18 to 39 years old who lives in
the EZ
• Increased Section 179 deduction allowing
business owners to re-cover all or part of the
cost of certain qualifying property. The
maximum section 179 deduction dollar limit can
be in-creased up to US$535,000 for EZ business
owners
• Non-Recognition of capital gains on rollover of
business assets
• Low interest EZ facility bonds issued by a Local
Government or a State Government
• Qualified Zone Academy Bonds (QZABs): No
interest bonds to “qualified zone academies”.
Local education agencies must obtain
commitments from private entities for qualified
contributions of no less than 10% of the bond

Source: United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (2014)

Recognised as a model program, the Cumberland Empowerment Zone
successfully leveraged the County’s rich natural resources and unique
heritage, addressing social and economic development challenges.
Having received A$27m in federal funding, the Cumberland program
attracted an additional ten times that amount in private and public
funding.
Cumberland’s resource based economy has been boosted by
Empowerment Zone funded projects ranging from the establishment of
a Food Innovation Center to seeding projects for the vital oyster and
shell fishing industries. Funding has helped create youth employment
programs as well as over 400 home renovation projects.
The Cumberland Empowerment Zone facilitated more than 130 job
creating projects leading to around 2,000 job opportunities for
residents of Cumberland’s most distressed communities.
Designated communities across the Cumberland County have also
been supported through the State of New Jersey’s Enterprise Zone
Program. This program offers incentives which encourage business
growth and create private sector jobs aimed at stimulating local
economies. Businesses within the boundaries of the zone benefit from
a reduced retail sales tax (half the standard rate at 3.5%), receive tax
exemptions on certain items (such as capital equipment, facility
expansions, upgrades and personal property), and receive tax credits
for hiring full time staff.

23

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

China Special Economic Zones
China first implemented four SEZ (Shantou Shenzhen, Xiamen
and Zhuhai) under Deng Xiaoping in 1979. Following their
success a further 15 SEZ were established in 1986.
Table 11: China Special Economic Zones
Factor

Description

Established

1979

Locations

19 SEZ (in addition China features a number of freetrade zones, state-level economic and technological
development zones, and high-tech industrial
development zones)

Incentives offered

• Reduction in nominal income tax to 15% (from
33%) for partly foreign owned enterprises
• Potential exemption from income tax for two
years
• Products manufactured in a SEZ are exempt from
customs duty when sold inside the free trade
zone or shipped outside China
• Tax refunds of up to 40% for direct reinvestment
of profits
• Reduced foreign visa restrictions

Case study: Hainan Special Economic Zone
Location: Hainan Island Province
Area covered by Zone: approximately 34,000 square kilometres.
Target Industries: Agriculture (rubber, fruit and seeds), tourism,
fisheries and herbal medicine.
Figure 13: Hainan Special Economic Zone

Source: UNCTAD (2000), Mack (2014)

SEZ policies include investment in new infrastructure,
preferential tax exemptions, and reduced restrictions on
foreign labour and capital.
The zones were critical in enticing foreign investment and
technology to drive China’s export led growth.
Thus far
China’s economic development has lifted over 600 million
people out of poverty (World Bank, 2010).
China’s most successful Special Economic Zone (Shenzhen)
developed from a small village into a thriving city with a
population over 10 million within 20 years (Mack, 2014).

Operating for more than 25 years, China’s southern most province of
Hainan represents the nation’s largest special economic zone (Roll,
1991). Hainan is an island richly endowed with natural resources and
minerals, a subtropical climate and two major ports with various small
supporting harbours which leverage the regions strategic location to
South East Asia (TriVista, 2010).
With preferential policies more generous than the mainland, Hainan
offers favourable investment incentives to foreign enterprises looking to
take advantage of this rapidly growing region. Investment incentives
are in the form of various tax exemptions, tax subsidies as well as
banking privileges and land use rights.
Hainan’s isolation from the mainland of China make manufacturing and

24

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

other heavier industries a less sought after investment.
Despite
boasting large reserves of iron ore (the 8th largest mine in Asia) and
one of China’s most abundant deposits of natural gas, Hainan is a SEZ
focused on sustainable industries, conserving its energy resources and
promoting tourism. The flow of investments from around the world in
the form of capital and infrastructure have transformed Hainan from an
isolated administrative island into a premier Chinese tourist and
investment destination. It’s economic and social development has made
outstanding progress over the last 25 years.

The SEZ has supported the significant growth and specialisation of
Hainan’s agriculture sector. Agriculture now accounts for over 50% of
annual exports with rubber and fruit the main products (TriVista, 2010).
In fact, the primary sector of Hainan accounts of the largest share of
GDP among all provinces in China and has grown rapidly since 1988
(National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2012).
The development of the tourism industry under the SEZ through open
policies and with significant international investment, has turned Hainan
into one of the world’s top international tourism islands. Tourism
accounts for a large proportion of Hainan’s GDP and since 1987 tourist
numbers and revenue have multiplied by 24 times and 150 times,
respectively (Xinhua, 2008).
Foreign-invested projects have recently been engaging in developing
industries of transportation, telecommunication, tourism, and energy.

25

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Where to From Here?
This document lays out the conceptual framework for
establishing a SEZ in the Pilbara region. In order to implement
and establish the SEZ and capture the regional and national
economic benefits a number of key actions are required.
The first requirement is both Commonwealth and State
Government support for the SEZ concept and the broader
vision for the Pilbara.
The second requirement is to establish the necessary policy
and governance framework to establish and manage the SEZ.
The third requirement is to put in place the aims, objectives
and key performance indicators required for the successful
operation of the SEZ.
The fourth requirement is a legislative platform. In order for
the SEZ to achieve its full potential, to be operated in an
efficient manner, to give investors confidence, to set long-term
planning goals.
The legislation required for the establishment of the SEZ
relates to simplifying enterprise registration and building and
development regulations and establishing the “one-stop- shop”
for potential investors within the SEZ.

From the Commonwealth Government, the SEZ will require the
following:
•

Legislation of potential investment incentives:
o

Removal of Fringe Benefits Tax on housing subsidies
paid to a permanent residential workforce within the
Pilbara SEZ.

o

Increase in the Personal Income Tax Zone Offset for
permanent residents within the Pilbara SEZ.

o

Extension of the regional skilled labour migration
agreement to encompass the broader range of
industries targeted by the SEZ.

•

One stop regulatory approval.

•

Establishment of an SEZ Advisory Board in conjunction
with State and Local Government and private sector
stakeholders.

Western Australian Government
From the WA Government, the SEZ will require the following:
•

The fifth requirement is the implementation of SEZ investment
incentives.

Commonwealth Government

o

Legislation of potential investment incentives:
o

Payroll Tax exemption.

o

Transfer Duty exemption.

o

Land Tax reduction.

•

One stop regulatory approval.

•

Approval of an SEZ Masterplan.

•

Establishment of the SEZ Advisory Board in conjunction
with Commonwealth and Local Government and private
sector stakeholders.

Reduction in Company Tax for companies based and
operating within the Pilbara SEZ.

26

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

References
ABS (2012). Census of Population and Housing, 2011. Cat. No.
2001.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.
ABS (2013). Regional Population Growth, Australia, 2012. Cat.
No. 3218.0. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.
Aggarwal, A. (2006). Performance of Export Processing
Zones: A Comparative Analysis of India, Sri Lanka, and
Bangladesh. Journal of Instaflag Institute, World SEZ
Association, Arizona, USA.
ANDEV

(2014).
About
ANDEV.
Available
http://www.andev-project.org/about-us/whatsneeded/. Last accessed 6 February 2014.

from:

DEEWR (2013). Small Area Labour Markets. Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
Canberra.
Deloitte Access Economics (2011). Long Term Economic and
Demographic Projections ADF Posture Review.
Available from: http://www.defence.gov.au/oscdf/adfposture-review/docs/interim/attachd.pdf. Last
accessed 5 February 2014.
Department of Immigration and Border Protection (2014).
Regional Migration Agreements. Available from:
https://www.immi.gov.au/skilled/regional-migrationagreements.htm. Last accessed 5 February 2014.
ETAX Accountants (2013). Zone Tax Offset: Do you Live or
Work in a Remote Area? Available from:
http://www.etax.com.au/blog/taxtips/2013/04/09/zone-tax-offsets. Last accessed 4
February 2014.

Farole, Thomas; Akinci, Gokhan (2011). Special Economic
Zones: Progress, Emerging Challenges, and Future
Directions. World Bank. © World Bank. Available from:
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2
341 License: CC BY 3.0 Unported. Last accessed 15
December 2013.
FIAS (2008). Special Economic Zones. Performance, Lessons
Learned, and Implications for Zone Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Geoscience Australia, Department of Resources, Energy and
Tourism (2012). Iron Fact Sheet. Available from:
http://www.australianminesatlas.gov.au/education/fact
_sheets/iron.html. Last accessed 12 November 2013.
HM Government (2014). Enterprise Zones. Available from:
http://enterprisezones.communities.gov.uk/. Last
accessed 6 February 2014.
ILO (2014) ILO Database on Export Processing Zones.
Available from: http://www.ilo.org/global/lang-en/index.htm. Last accessed 6 February 2014.
Jenkins, M., et al (1998). Export Processing Zones in Central
America. Development Discussion Paper No. 646,
Harvard Institute for International Development,
Harvard University.
Liberal and National Party Coalition (2013). The Coalition’s
2030 Vision for Developing Northern Australia.
Available
from:
http://www.nationals.org.au/Portals/0/2013/policy/Dev
eloping%20Northern%20Australia%20%20National%20Party.pdf. Last accessed 6 February
2014.

27

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Mack, L (2014). Chinese Special Economic Zones. Available
from:
http://chineseculture.about.com/od/businesseconomy/
a/Chinas-Special-Economic-Zones-Sez.htm. Last
accessed 6 February 2014.
National Bureau of Statistics of China (2012). Hainan
Statistical Yearbook 2012. China Statistical Publishing,
Beijing.
NewAnglia (2014). Diesel Power Solutions Moves to Enterprise
Zone and Doubles in Size. Available from:
http://www.newanglia.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2014/01/Diesel-EZ-FINAL.pdf. Last
accessed 6 February 2014.
Pilbara Area Consultative Committee Inc. (2008). The Pilbara
Plan. Available from:
http://www.rdapilbara.org.au/publications/the_pilbaraplan.pdf. Last accessed 5 February 2014.
Pilbara Development Commission. Pilbara Cities. Available
from: http://www.pdc.wa.gov.au/pilbara-cities/. Last
accessed 12 November 2013.
Pilbara Regional Council (Undated). Data Provided for the
Development of the Pilbara Special Economic Zone.
Pilbara Regional Council.
Pilbara Workforce Development Alliance, (2013). Pilbara
Workforce Development Plan 2013-2016. Department
of Training and Workforce Development, WA.
Planning WA (2012). Pilbara Planning and Infrastructure
Framework. Available from:
http://www.planning.wa.gov.au/publications/6661.asp.
Last accessed 4 February 2014.
RDA (2012a). Pilbara Report Investment Prospectus Summary
2012, Exploring Opportunities in the Nation’s
Powerhouse. Regional Development Australia, Pilbara,
Western Australia.

RDA (2012b). Pilbara Report 2012, Exploring Opportunities in
the Nation’s Powerhouse. Regional Development
Australia, Pilbara, Western Australia.
RDA (2013). The Cost of Doing Business in the Pilbara.
Available from:
http://www.rdapilbara.org.au/resources/site1/General/
Publication%20Reports/RDA%20Business%20in%20Pil
bara_SinglePages.pdf. Last accessed 6 February 2014.
Roll, C (1991). A Comparison of Hainan with the Other Special
Economic Zones. RAND, Santa Monica, CA.
TriVista (2010). Understand China – Hainan. Available from:
http://www.understandchina.com/province/hainan/.
Last accessed 17 December 2013.
UNCTAD (2000). Tax Incentives and Foreign Direct Investment
A Global Survey. Available from:
http://unctad.org/en/Docs/iteipcmisc3_en.pdf. Last
accessed 6 February 2014.
United Kingdom Department for Communities and Local
Government (2011). Enterprise Zone Prospectus.
London. CLG.
United Kingdom Department for Communities and Local
Government (2013). Fund Fuels Private Sector
Investment Boosting Local Economies and Jobs.
Available from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/fund-fuelsprivate-sector-investment-boosting-local-economiesand-jobs. Last accessed 6 February 2014.
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(2014). List of Current Empowerment Zones and
Updated Contact Information. Available from:
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_of
fices/comm_planning/economicdevelopment/programs
/rc/ezcontacts. Last accessed 6 February 2014.
WA Department of Finance (2013). State Revenue. Available
from:

28

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

https://www.finance.wa.gov.au/cms/section.aspx?id=2
09. Last accessed 4 February 2014.
WAPC (2012). Pilbara Planning and Infrastructure Framework,
2012. Pilbara Regional Planning Committee, Western
Australian Planning Commission, Western Australia.
World Bank (2010). Results Profile: China Poverty Reduction.
Available from:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2010/03/1
9/results-profile-china-poverty-reduction. Last
accessed 6 February 2014.
World Economic Forum (2013). The Global Competitiveness
Report 2013 – 2014. Available from:
http://www.weforum.org/reports/globalcompetitiveness-report-2013-2014. Last accessed 4
February 2014.
Xinhua (2008). China's Hainan Island Unveils Blueprint for Int'l
Tourist Island. Available from:
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/200804/25/content_8051979.htm. Last accessed 17
December 2013.

29

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Appendix A: Economic Profile of the Pilbara
Population
Total population in the Pilbara has increased on a yearly basis since 2001. In 2012 there
were almost 65,000 people in the region. The Pilbara region has experienced a relatively
steady rate of population growth over the last decade, estimated at around 4.5%.
However in 2012 the Pilbara recorded its lowest rate of population growth since 2002 at
3.5%, this was driven by slowing population growth in two of its Local Government Areas
(LGA), Ashburton and East Pilbara. In 2012, the state’s population growth was around
the same rate as the Pilbara.
Figure A.1: Population and Population Growth
70,000

16.0%

60,000

14.0%

Population (No.)

10.0%
40,000
8.0%
30,000
6.0%
20,000

4.0%

10,000

Population Growth (%)

12.0%

50,000

2.0%

0

0.0%
2001

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
The Pilbara (LHS)
Western Australia Growth (%) (RHS)
East Pilbara Growth (%) (RHS)
Port Hedland Growth (%) (RHS)

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
The Pilbara Growth (%) (RHS)
Ashburton Growth (%) (RHS)
Roebourne Growth (%) (RHS)

Source: ABS (2013)

30

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Gross Regional Product
In the 2011-12 financial year, the total Gross Regional Product (GRP) for the Pilbara
region was estimated at $41.5 billion. The region’s economy posted an annual growth
rate twice as fast as the state at around 12% in 2011-12, this was driven by Port
Hedland and Roebourne. Pilbara has reported an average annual growth rate of 11.4%
since 2006-07.

20.0%

$40,000.0

18.0%

$35,000.0

16.0%

Gross&Regional&Product&($M)

$45,000.0

14.0%

$30,000.0

12.0%

$25,000.0

10.0%

$20,000.0

8.0%

$15,000.0

6.0%

$10,000.0

4.0%

$5,000.0

2.0%

$0.0
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
The3Pilbara3GRP3($M)3LHS
Western3Australia3%3Growth3(RHS)
East3Pilbara3%3Growth3(RHS)
Port3Hedland3%3Growth3(RHS)

Annual&%&Growth

Figure A.2: Gross Regional Product (GRP) 2006-07 to 2011-12

0.0%
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
The3Pilbara3%3Growth3(RHS)
Ashburton3%3Growth3(RHS)
Roeburne3%3Growth3(RHS)

Source: AECgroup (Unpublished)

Industry Value Add
The mining sector accounted for 86% of economic activity in the Pilbara region during the
2011-12 financial year. Of the four LGAs that comprise the Pilbara region, Ashburton and
East Pilbara both source over 90% of economic activity from the mining sector, while
Roebourne and Port Hedland source less than 80%. With such heavy reliance on the
mining sector for economic activity, the construction sector also plays a key role in
supporting the mining sector. In 2011-12, construction activity contributed around 7%
to economic activity in the Pilbara region, particularly driven by activity in Roebourne and
Port Hedland.

31

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Figure A.3: Industry Value Add (IVA) by Industry, 2011-12
0.7%
1.5%

Mining

0.7% 0.6%

Construction

7.3%

Transport, postal & warehousing
Public administration & safety
Professional, scientific & technical
services
Electricity, gas, water & waste
services
Health care & social assistance
Wholesale trade
Manufacturing
Accommodation & food services
Education & training
Retail trade
Rental, hiring & real estate services
Financial & insurance services
86.0%

Agriculture, forestry & fishing

Source: AECgroup (Unpublished)

Table A.1: Industry Value Add (IVA) Contribution Comparison, 2011-12
Industry
Mining

Ashburton

East
Pilbara

Roebourne

Port
Hedland

The
Pilbara

Western
Australia

92.4%

95.3%

72.7%

76.8%

86.0%

38.1%

Construction

4.5%

2.2%

15.0%

10.5%

7.3%

13.0%

Transport, postal & warehousing

0.6%

0.2%

2.9%

3.4%

1.5%

4.9%

Public administration & safety

0.5%

0.4%

1.2%

1.2%

0.7%

2.8%

Professional, scientific & technical
services

0.4%

0.3%

1.4%

1.1%

0.7%

5.9%

Electricity, gas, water & waste
services

0.1%

0.2%

1.5%

0.8%

0.6%

2.3%

Health care & social assistance

0.2%

0.2%

0.9%

1.1%

0.5%

4.3%

Wholesale trade

0.2%

0.2%

0.8%

0.9%

0.4%

3.3%

Manufacturing

0.1%

0.2%

0.8%

0.9%

0.4%

5.3%

Accommodation & food services

0.2%

0.2%

0.4%

0.6%

0.3%

1.4%

Education & training

0.1%

0.1%

0.6%

0.5%

0.3%

2.9%

Retail trade

0.1%

0.1%

0.5%

0.6%

0.3%

3.4%

Rental, hiring & real estate services

0.1%

0.1%

0.4%

0.5%

0.2%

1.5%

Financial & insurance services

0.1%

0.1%

0.4%

0.5%

0.2%

4.0%

Agriculture, forestry & fishing

0.2%

0.2%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

1.5%

Administrative & support services

0.1%

0.1%

0.3%

0.2%

0.1%

2.1%

Information media &
telecommunications

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

1.4%

Other services

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

1.5%

Arts & recreation services

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.0%

0.5%

Source: AECgroup (Unpublished)

32

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Industry Contribution
The mining and construction sectors provide the greatest returns to the economy in
terms of incomes, gross operating surplus and taxes. Together, mining and construction
form over 95% of the region’s gross operating surplus and almost 80% of total taxes
paid.
Table A.2: Contribution by Industry
Indicator

Units

Incomes

Gross Operating
Surplus

Taxes Less Subsidies
Products

Production

Agriculture, forestry and fishing

%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.3%

Mining

%

52.6%

92.7%

79.6%

54.9%

Manufacturing

%

2.8%

0.5%

2.7%

2.4%

Electricity, gas, water and waste services

%

0.9%

0.4%

0.6%

1.5%

Construction

%

18.9%

3.4%

6.4%

16.7%

Wholesale trade

%

1.4%

0.2%

0.5%

1.3%

Retail trade

%

1.4%

0.1%

0.3%

1.5%

Accommodation and food services

%

1.8%

0.2%

3.6%

2.5%

Transport, postal and warehousing

%

4.4%

1.1%

3.2%

5.7%

Information media and telecommunications

%

0.2%

0.1%

0.0%

0.1%

Financial and insurance services

%

0.6%

0.2%

0.5%

0.7%

Rental, hiring and real estate services

%

1.3%

0.2%

0.6%

3.0%

Professional, scientific and technical services

%

2.0%

0.2%

0.7%

2.0%

Administrative and support services

%

3.0%

0.1%

0.2%

2.9%

Public administration and safety

%

2.6%

0.1%

0.2%

1.9%

Education and training

%

2.5%

0.1%

0.1%

0.6%

Health care and social assistance

%

2.1%

0.1%

0.1%

1.0%

Arts and recreation services

%

0.1%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Other services
Total

%
$M.

1.2%

0.1%

0.5%

1.1%

$3,627.0

$16,231.8

$166.6

$180.9

Source: AECgroup

33

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Employment
The total labour force of the Pilbara was 29,328 in June 2013, this represents a 16%
increase since June 2008. Roebourne and Port Hedland currently represent over two
thirds (68%) of the Pilbara’s local labour force.
Unemployment in the Pilbara was 3.6% in June 2013, with Port Hedland and East Pilbara
reporting the highest unemployment rates, both slightly above the state around 5%.
Figure A.4: Labour Force, Mar-07 to Jun-13
35,000

9.0%
8.0%

30,000

7.0%

Labour Force (No.)

6.0%

20,000

5.0%

15,000

4.0%
3.0%

10,000

2.0%
5,000

Unemployment Rate (%)

25,000

1.0%
0.0%

Mar-07
Jun-07
Sep-07
Dec-07
Mar-08
Jun-08
Sep-08
Dec-08
Mar-09
Jun-09
Sep-09
Dec-09
Mar-10
Jun-10
Sep-10
Dec-10
Mar-11
Jun-11
Sep-11
Dec-11
Mar-12
Jun-12
Sep-12
Dec-12
Mar-13
Jun-13

0

The Pilbara (LHS)

The Pilbara (RHS)

Western Australia (RHS)

Ashburton (RHS)

East Pilbara (RHS)

Roebourne (RHS)

Port Hedland (RHS)
Source: DEEWR (2013)

34

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

The mining and construction sectors were the most significant employers in the Pilbara
region during 2011. These two sectors employed greater proportions of non-local
workers, suggesting the strong presence of FIFO worker arrangements in those
industries.
The Pilbara’s employment profile demonstrates a similar reliance on the same sectors as
its economic structure.
Figure A.5: Employment by Industry by PoUR and PoW (2011)
Mining
Construction
Accommodation and food services
Transport, postal and warehousing
Administrative and support services

Education and training
Manufacturing
Health care and social assistance
Retail trade
Professional, scientific and technical services
Public administration and safety
Other services
Rental, hiring and real estate services
Wholesale trade

The Pilbara (PoW)

Electricity, gas, water and waste services
Agriculture, forestry and fishing

The Pilbara (PoUR)

Financial and insurance services
Western Australia (PoW)

Arts and recreation services
Information media and telecommunications
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Employment by Industry (%)
Source: ABS (2012)

35

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

Those working in the Pilbara received on average $1,758.3 per week. This was 1.6 times
higher, on average, than the earnings of those working in Western Australia. Higher
incomes in almost all industries compared to Western Australia in 2011.
Figure A.6: Average Weekly Individual Income by Industry, 2011
Mining
Electricity, gas, water & waste services
Professional, scientific & technical services
Construction
Manufacturing
Transport, postal & warehousing
Wholesale trade
Rental, hiring & real estate services
Other services
Information media & telecommunications
Public administration & safety
Administrative & support services
Financial & insurance services
Accommodation & food services
Health care & social assistance
Education & training
Agriculture, forestry & fishing
Retail trade
Arts & recreation services
$0.0

$500.0

$1,000.0

The Pilbara

$1,500.0

$2,000.0

$2,500.0

Western Australia

Source: ABS (2012)

The average weekly household income in the Pilbara was 1.4 times higher than the
average household income for the state. The highest average household incomes were
reported in Port Hedland and Roebourne, $2,949.4 and $2,944.3 respectively, this is
compared to the state average of $2,005.6.
Figure A.7: Average Household Income, 2011 ($/week)

Average Household Income ($/week)

$3,500.0

$3,000.0

$2,500.0

$2,000.0

$1,500.0

$1,000.0

$500.0

$0.0
Ashburton

East Pilbara

Roebourne

Port Hedland

The Pilbara

Western
Australia

Source: AECgroup (Unpublished)

36

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2
Economic Prosperity: Pilbara Special Economic Zone

PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

37

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 87 - Attachment 2

