Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 89

11 May, 2018
Mr Mark Fitt
Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
Dear Mr Fitt,
RE: Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Regional Australia
As Secretariat to the Inland Queensland Roads Action Project (IQ-RAP) Working Group, Regional Development
Australia (RDA) Townsville and North West Queensland makes this submission to represent 34 funding partners
including 28 local governments, five RDA Committees and RACQ, to address the issues associated with regional
equity in infrastructure investment.
Indicator of inequitable outcomes in road safety
11.8 people per 100,000 die on rural roads in Australia each year; 2.5 people per 100,000 die on metropolitan roads.
(Source: Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics)
Indicator of inequitable outcomes in road investment to improve road safety, productivity, resilience in access
In the 2018 Federal Budget, 6.6% of the Queensland Key Projects budget allocations went to the inland Queensland area (west
of the Bruce Highway and outside South-East Queensland) which makes up approximately 85% of the state’s area. This area
produces Australia’s significant coal, minerals and beef exports worth approximately $75 billion to the national economy.

Infrastructure
Investment into regional road infrastructure has not kept pace with regional needs or expectations, while large
scale projects continue to go ahead in metropolitan areas. We recommend it is time to review the methodologies
and models used to make investment decisions, in particular in relation to regional roads investment.
While government budgets and programs are published, it is not always easy to compare like for like in regard to
roads investment. Based on population, investment is driven mostly to metropolitan areas. However, if a wider
range of factors was considered, a case could be built for more investment into regional areas. As mentioned above,
whole of government objectives could lead to more investment into regional areas to achieve benefits that are of
importance to multiple departments.
The Inland Queensland Roads Action Project (IQ-RAP) delivered a plan in 2016 to demonstrate the gaps between
current road and bridge infrastructure and the Department of Transport and Main Roads own standards. The plan
identified that there were more than 300 bridges and 3,000km of road network that required upgrading to fit-forpurpose standards.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 89

There is a strong economic rationale for investing in regional Queensland. Queensland is a decentralized state, with
$194 billion of Gross State Product (GSP) generated outside Brisbane. That is equal to 62% of Queensland’s annual
GSP and 11% of Australia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Regional Queensland contributes more to the national
economy than South Australia, Tasmania, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory combined.
Regional Queensland hosts industries such as mining, resources and energy; agriculture; and tourism contributing
significantly to GSP and employment. They contribute $55 billion, $20 billion and $25 billion respectively to the
national and state economy.
The Queensland Roads and Transport Investment Program (QTRIP) provides guidance for the next four years but
this doesn’t meet the needs of local governments in developing their 10-year asset management plans and
community development goals, nor does it give confidence for long-term retention of skilled workers and their
families.
IQ-RAP partners believe there is a need and opportunity to reassess the framework for investment decision-making
for regional roads. Productivity, safety, industry diversification through tourism, maintenance impacts on vehicles,
animal welfare, dust impact on animals and crops and visibility and reliability of access are most important to inland
road stakeholders; current benefit cost ratio analysis models favour the convenience factor for large numbers of
commuters saving small amounts of commuting time in capital cities.
The current one size fits all decision making methodology is flawed when it comes to regional roads investment
decision-making and this issue would apply to many other infrastructure cases.
AgriFutures Australia has also recently released a report on this same issue.
http://www.agrifutures.com.au/publications/research-activities-on-rural-roads/
Please refer to www.rdanwq.org.au/iq-rap for further details or I would be delighted to respond to any further
questions you may have. I can be contacted on
or
. I am also the
CEO of the Regional Development Australia Townsville and North West Queensland Committee.
Yours sincerely

Ms Glenys Schuntner
Secretariat
IQ-RAP Working Group

Page | 2

