Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 9

To the Committee Secretary
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
RE: INQUIRY INTO THE INDICATORS OF, AND IMPACT OF, REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA
The Shire of Carnamah as a community, would like to comment on the following ‘Terms of Reference’;
regarding the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to
government policies and programs:
a)

fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
GST / ROAD FUNDING IN REGIONAL WA: The federal level fiscal policies regarding GST
distribution, has meant Western Australia is not receiving an equitable share of this revenue
stream. The result is that regional communities have had their road funding cut, in an
environment where regional road infrastructure was already proven to be underfunded, due to
federal and state government fiscal policies. In contrast metropolitan areas, especially those on
the east coast of Australia, receive much higher levels of funding and have a much higher
standard of road infrastructure than regional communities. This is despite the fact that it has
been repeatedly demonstrated, using road counters, that our regional roads have high volumes
of heavy haulage traffic.
EDUCATION FUNDING IN REGIONAL WA: The recent state level fiscal policies regarding
education funding, has meant regional Western Australia is not given equitable access to
educational opportunities. In the metropolitan area students have access to numerous
schooling options and facilities as well as transport networks to access them. Students in the
regions do not. For example families who cannot afford boarding fees in Perth, have been using
regional residential hostels for their children to be able to access outer metropolitan high
schools. The proposed closure of Moora Residential hostel means they will either have to move
to Perth or face a 400km round trip to Geraldton for school, by private transport, as there is no
bus. The government has advised this decision was made purely to meet budgetary needs.

b)

improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
LAND DEVLOPMENT IN REGIONAL WA: All regions have the same problem with land
developers being able to override local planning policy by appealing to SAT. This disregards the
communities wishes that government reforms insisted are taken into account, in the
‘Community Strategic Plans’. It also disregards the cost of externalities that many regional
communities are left to try and fund, due to economic rationalism focused on short terms gains
that are realised by the developers not the community. For example loss of wetlands,
contaminated water air soil, loss of flora and fauna and other natural resources, poor amenity
and loss of economic enterprise through commercial resources use, tourism etc.

c)

regional development policies;
REGIONAL DEVLOPMENT IN WA: All communities need facilities and services but there is a
growing trend to not approve funding for developments, especially recreational, based on
population, or because a neighbouring region may have similar facilities. But this is unfair as
regional communities do not have regular public transport to access these facilities and services
and fuel costs are usually much, much higher in the regions than metropolitan areas.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 9

d)

infrastructure;
UTILTIES IN REGIONAL WA: All utilities are government provided.
Currently the national telecommunication service provider Telstra has indicted it will not, nor
plans to provide, appropriate broadband service to region through the NBN rollout, as it has no
commercial interest to do so. As a result many communities are trying to fund their own broad
band service network – metropolitan areas are provided with this service, especially in the
eastern states. Regions need it for education opportunities and to improve connectivity for
agricultural businesses in regional WA. High speed NBN would benefit the community and allow
the agricultural industry to take advantage of the latest technologies coming out of Europe,
Canada and the USA. This would enable the sector and region to continue to develop and be a
competitive contributor to the regional, national and global economies.
In addition government power is provided at a high price using non- renewable energy.
Regulations need to be changed so that regional communities can move to mostly low cost
renewable energy options and pay a minimum levy for infrastructure maintenance - which is
not always happening in regional areas - hence the ongoing issues with extreme fires caused in
summer by powerlines in regional WA. Lack of affordable power is a block to regional
development.
ROADS IN REGIONAL WA: The federal and state level fiscal policies regarding road funding, has
meant Western Australia is not receiving an adequate share of this revenue stream. This is
despite the fact that it has been repeatedly demonstrated, using road counters, that our roads
have high volumes of heavy haulage traffic. The result is that regional communities have
inadequate road funding, in an environment where road infrastructure was already proven to
be underfunded. In contrast metropolitan areas, especially those on the east coast of Australia,
receive much higher levels of funding and have a much higher standard of road infrastructure
than regional communities.

e)

education;
EDUCATION IN REGIONAL WA: The recent state level fiscal policies regarding education
funding, has meant regional Western Australia is not given equitable access to educational
opportunities. In the metropolitan area students have access to numerous schooling options
and facilities as well as transport networks to access them. Students in the regions do not. For
example although our school goes from K to 12, there are no senior level (11&12) subjects
offered for university entrance. Again this means regional families need to travel at significant
cost and time, to access the education that metropolitan students are given.

f)

building human capital;
For regional communities this is significantly impacted by the inequality around, fiscal policy,
poor infrastructure, development funding criteria, housing, as well as lack of education and
training opportunities.

g)

enhancing local workforce skills;
SKILLS IN REGIONAL WA: Regional Western Australia is not given equitable access to training
opportunities. In the metropolitan area the workforce has access to numerous options and
facilities, such as TAFE and the Universities, as well as the transport networks to access them.
The regions do not, and funding to CRC’s is being cuts so there will be even less services.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 9

h)

employment arrangements;
Regional communities have much higher unemployment rates than most metropolitan areas,
and need both funding and a reduction in red tape to be able to establish new enterprises and
employment opportunities. Currently Local governments are not allowed to operate
commercial operations but in regional communities they should be given federal and state
funding to be able to develop and facilitate new industries and regional opportunities.

i)

decentralisation policies;
For regional communities the inequality caused by the offices of government agencies and
services being in the metropolitan area is significant. Decisions are often made by public
servants who have no understanding of the realities of regional life and commerce. For example
the decision to close Moora Hostel to meet state budget requirements potentially could result
in a population decline of 26% over the next five years if all 30 families that may be impacted
leave the Shire. There are only 3 students at Moora currently, but there is a future and wider
implication over the next 1 to 5 years, not just for Carnamah, but for other regional
communities as well. The supermarket, post office, fuel station, bank, school and social groups,
cannot afford a 26% drop in patronage.
Further the move from the regional centres many years ago by government, has resulted in
ongoing increased unemployment, underemployment, and reduced regional populations due to
a lack of services and professional opportunities. For example if the branch of an agency is
located in the regions – 99% of the executive and director roles are based in the metro area, so
people who progress, need to leave the regions and regional communities are not involved in
decision making.

j)

innovation; as employment arrangements

k)

manufacturing; employment arrangements

l)

any other related matters
Commercial monopolies: many people in region areas pay excessive amounts for goods and
services. The excessive cost of fuel in regional areas is of ongoing concern. Others include
localised monopolies – for example the regional Chemist in the next town charges customers an
extra $25, plus their scripts cost - to be a registered customer or refuses to fill the script if they
won’t pay to become a registered customer: and also charges customers a $9 fee for giving
advice regarding which over the counter medicines can go together, if the customer then
decides not to buy anything. Some customers have little choice as they have no way to travel to
another centre, or can’t afford the fuel to go to the regional centres. This does need regulatory
intervention.

Kind Regards
Karen Oborn
Chief Executive Officer
Shire of Carnamah

