Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 91

14 May 2018
Committee Secretary
Senate Economics Reference Committee
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Sir/Madam
Inquiry into the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia
I make this submission on behalf of the councils of the North West Queensland Regional Organisation
of Councils (NWQROC). Members of NWQROC include the Burke, Carpentaria, Cloncurry, Flinders,
McKinlay, and Richmond Shire Councils; Doomadgee Aboriginal Shire Council and Mount Isa City
Council.
These councils serve the people and support the businesses in some of the State’s and Australia’s
more remote communities and on a daily basis live and work with the indicators and impacts of
regional inequality.
This presents itself in two fundamental ways: 1) lack of access to, and 2) high cost of goods and services
when compared with metropolitan and major coastal communities. No matter where people live in
Australia there is an increasing expectation about the equal availability and cost of goods and services
particularly those provided by or subsidised by governments.
The sustainability of many communities in remote parts of Australia is dependent upon improving the
lifestyle of residents. The gradual loss of population particularly the young in search of work and
education opportunities and the difficulty of recruiting and retaining professionals and their families
is a consequence of the two challenges identified above.
Inequality and Extra Costs
Examples of inequality and costs borne by residents and business in the NWQROC area and possible
responses are as follows:
Costs of Living & Doing Business


Additional travel cost to attend sport events for parents, and/or additional training travel
further exacerbates the situation faced by already hard pressed remote community families.
1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 91







Additional cost for shipping of general household goods if a product is not available locally.
Business competitiveness with on-costs associated with the transport of goods, and the
impact on productivity when it comes to items like spare parts for machinery. The cost for
businesses to have spares on hand to cover all needs is virtually impossible.
Fuel cost in remote areas is much higher for private and business purposes combined with the
long distances that have to be travelled.
The high costs of regional airline services and the limited availability of discount fares to
residents for personal and medical travel needs. These fares are usually taken up by long term
corporate and government customers.
Response:
 Introduction of remote area taxation concessions for small to medium businesses*.
 Introduction of reduced taxation levels for remote area residents*.
 Continued pressure on regional airline service providers to ensure discount air fares
are more readily available to permanent residents.
*see Remote Area Taxation Reform below.

Health and Education


Councils are increasingly drawn into providing extraordinary services such as funding
community nurses, providing doctor’s accommodation, constructing medical centres and
subsidising the Commonwealth’s Community Care Program services. This is necessary for the
health and safety of residents and to make communities more liveable. If these basic services
are not available remote towns are less attractive as places in which to live and raise a family.
Councils should be supported for providing these services traditionally the responsibility of
State and Federal governments.
Response:
 Increased financial support for Councils providing extraordinary services.
 Improved access to tele health services supported by greater investment in
broadband and telecommunication infrastructure.



Education for remote community children is being disadvantaged due to the strict student to
teacher ratios applied to class sizes. Multi-year classes of up to four grades in one class are
inequitable when compared to populated areas and are putting at risk the education of
children in remote communities.
Response:
 Relax the student to teacher ratios in schools so that remote communities have higher
teacher numbers and budgets to provide better educational opportunities and
maintain the schools in general.

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 91

Telecommunications


The limited availability at an affordable price of high speed broadband and mobile phone
communications for remote properties and communities is a major impediment to rural
sector innovation and productivity and the education of children attending the school of the
air.
Response:
 Ongoing co-funding investment with service providers, private sector and state and
local governments to extend the fibre optic cable network and expand the coverage
of the mobile phone network.

Roads and Transport


The high costs to transport freight and livestock on the Mount Isa to Townsville rail line is
forcing greater heavy vehicle traffic onto the Flinders Highway.
Response:
 Upgrading of the highway and rail line is necessary to increase transport efficiency,
support economic development in the region and improve safety for all road and rail
users.

Tourism


Product and service provision capability development are essential to the continued growth
of tourism in the region to provide increased economic diversity and extend the session from
the current six to seven months each year. Many tourist operations are small scale with
limited resources to expand product and service capability.
Response:
 Increased support targeted at remote area tourism product development and service
capability improvement.

Remote Area Taxation Reform
Specifically on the question of taxation reform for remote areas the following points are made.
The Australian Tax System as it stands is counterproductive. Our workforce is getting older and the
welfare liability is growing.
Remote areas of Australia are losing their young people with ambition because of the lack of
opportunities locally. The use of Fly-In-Fly-Out (FIFO) workforces particularly by multi-national
resources sector companies is making the situation worse.
If there were real tax benefits given to long term residents who live and work in these remote areas
people would be more inclined to make “country Australia” somewhere to raise their families.

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 91

In this age of the millennials, professional service providers – accountants, solicitors and a wide range
of consultants, service remote areas from the cities without actually setting foot in remote towns. This
means the reverse could be true. They could live in a country town and operate successfully there and
elsewhere if they wished and were attracted to do so.
A flatter rate of personal income tax given to genuine locals who actually live and raise their families
locally would encourage growth in these areas. It can’t be a rebate, it has to be money in their pocket
and it has to be given to the employees not businesses with company head offices located in a capitol
city either in Australia or overseas.
If workers are receiving more money weekly they will spend more locally hence local businesses get a
share as well. A rebate system will not work as effectively because the lump sum is more likely to be
spent externally to the area, for example, on a holiday or new car which means the money leaves the
area.
In addition the Payroll Tax threshold could be raised for small businesses in remote areas to encourage
growth in that area as well. A sliding scale for personal income tax calculated on remoteness and/or
population would also support the objective of retaining and attracting workers to remote
communities.
Many councils in rural and remote areas subdivide land and absorb the cost of developing to make
the new blocks more affordable. In this way current ratepayers are investing in the opportunities to
attract new residents. Notwithstanding, councils can’t encourage growth even though the actual cost
of building a home is not that more expensive than in populated areas. If a person was able to raise
their family locally and at the same time be paying a rate of income tax of say, 15% to 20% up to
$90,000 income, regardless of hours worked, the “people would come”. With population growth there
is a flow on to an increase in better local services from the larger rate base, less reliance on external
funding (increased sustainability), together with better health and education services.
Increasing job opportunities in this way would also help reduce the welfare dependence and
unemployment benefits paid to those currently unable to get a job locally. The actual savings to the
Federal Government would help in offsetting the costs of the flattened rate of tax.
Changes recently announced in the 2018 Federal Budget to the taxation system to be debated by
Parliament acknowledge the need for the taxation system to be kept under review to provide not only
the revenue needs of the nation but also its structure to encourage and reward the effort of
Australians contributing to the economic, social and environmental wellbeing of the nation. The
taxation system should also be structured to enable people to more easily choose where they live and
work to grow communities and maintain social cohesion. This is particularly important in remote
areas, such as Queensland’s North West, which produces its share of the nation’s wealth through both
the resources and rural industry sectors well above its population share. It can only continue to do so
through the growth of it rural communities, support for their businesses and the provision of public
services on a comparable basis with metropolitan and coastal regions. Further changes to the taxation
system are central to this outcome.

4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 91

Two member councils of the NWQROC – Flinders Shire Council and Cloncurry Shire Council, have made
submissions to the Inquiry elaborating further on the issues of regional inequality facing Queensland’s
North West. We would welcome the opportunity to meet with the committee to expand on our
submissions.

Yours Sincerely

Greg Hoffman PSM
Executive Director
North West Queensland Regional Organisation of Councils
PO Box 31
NORMANTON QLD 4890

5

