Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the
Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in
Australia
1.

Background and context

On 14 February 2018, the Senate requested that the Senate Economics References Committee
conduct an inquiry into and report on the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.

2.

Introduction

The Northern Territory has a geographically dispersed and isolated population base. Three quarters
of the population reside in the Territory's five regional centres (Darwin, Nhulunbuy, Katherine,
Tennant Creek and Alice Springs), which also serve as vital supply and service bases for smaller
remote communities. The majority of Territorians live in Darwin and the satellite city of Palmerston
and surrounds (the current population of Darwin is 143 6291), and the Central Australia region
(including Alice Springs) is the second most populated area. The remainder of the population lives
in Katherine, Tennant Creek and the coastal town of Nhulunbuy or in the hundreds of other small
remote outstations and homelands throughout the Northern Territory.
The Northern Territory economy is largely cyclical and project-based, and prone to volatility,
particularly once transition from investment to less labour intensive operational phases of major
projects occurs. The short-term nature of construction employment associated with major projects
causes the Northern Territory to experience volatile population growth - population surges during the
construction phase of major projects and workers (and their families) often leave the Northern
Territory once highly paid project-related construction jobs finish.
The government sector, mining and manufacturing and construction play a large role in the
Northern Territory economy, contributing 50.6 per cent collectively to the Territory economy and
56.9 per cent of employment in 2015-16. Several regional towns have developed around mining or
other dominant industries.
The Northern Territory has 96 major/minor Aboriginal communities and 613 recorded homelands
dispersed widely across the Northern Territory.
The vast majority of these communities are in very remote locations as defined by the ‘The Australian
Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS) Remoteness Structure’.
Over 51 000 Aboriginal people live in very remote Aboriginal communities or homelands (21 per cent
of the total Northern Territory population).2

1

https://cmsexternal.nt.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/434546/Northern-Territory-Economic-DevelopmentFramework.pdf)
2
Department of the Chief Minister – Presentation to UN-Rapporteur 2017
NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
Page 1 of 13
15 May 2018

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia

3.

Northern Territory Government Comments against the
Terms of Reference
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia, with particular reference to government
policies and programs in the following areas:
a) fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
b) improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies;
c) regional development policies;
d) infrastructure;
e) education;
f) building human capital;
g) enhancing local workforce skills;
h) employment arrangements;
i) decentralisation policies;
j) innovation;
k) manufacturing; and
l) any other related matters.

In the Northern Territory there is substantial inequality largely determined by the presence of a
significant employing industry that generates economic activity and income. While the
Northern Territory Government believes all of the areas highlighted in the terms of reference are
important, this response focuses on the following areas:


Improved coordination of federal, state and local government policies;



Regional development policies, including enhancing local workforce skills;



Infrastructure;



Education; and



Decentralisation policies.

Research undertaken by the Northern Territory Government highlights the linkage between
sustainable population growth and economic development. A suitably sized and skilled labour force
is critical to economic growth and diversification. In the context of the Northern Territory’s small
population the limited supply of skilled labour means that major projects are largely completed
through the use imported labour. The use of temporary workforces during periods of economic
expansion associated with major projects is an inhibitor to longer term business and economic
growth.
Due to remoteness, people are restricted in their access to everyday services that provide the
foundation for growth and prosperity in today’s economy. Examples of these impacts are seen in
early childhood, education, health and employment outcomes.
The Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) report produced by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics ranks areas in Australia according to relative socio-economic advantage and
disadvantage. The indexes are based on information from the five-yearly Census of Population and
Housing.
SEIFA 2016 shows that the 10 most disadvantaged local government areas in Australia can be found
in Queensland and the Northern Territory.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 2 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia

4.

Improved coordination of federal, state and local
government policy

The Northern Territory Government’s Local Decision Making plan provides a pathway for Aboriginal
communities to have more control over their own affairs, including service delivery based on a
community’s aspirations and needs.
The Northern Territory Government recognises that building, supporting and investing in strong
Aboriginal governance is necessary to ensure local people drive local solutions, and that Aboriginal
organisations are supported in managing local decision making. This helps to set communities up
for success.
Government and Aboriginal communities will work together to develop policies and practices for
service delivery, such as housing; local government; education, training and jobs; health; children
and families; and law and justice.
This place-based approach should also be considered by the Commonwealth Government as an
appropriate way to co-design policies and services for regional and remote areas.
The Northern Territory Government believes it is important that any new or revised Closing the Gap
strategy is developed in partnership with states and territories and with Aboriginal stakeholders,
communities and organisations. This will ensure that it is coordinated, meaningful, and able to be
implemented on the ground. Furthermore, the Northern Territory Government believes any new or
revised strategy should be evidence-based and accompanied by appropriate resourcing and
commitments to sustainability.
The Northern Territory Government believes the existing framework for Closing the Gap, which
focuses exclusively on disadvantage in the areas of health, education and employment, should be
expanded to capture a more holistic picture. The refreshed agenda should be expanded to capture
targets or commitments about socio-economic indicators that Aboriginal Territorians have identified
as being important through Council of Australian Governments Aboriginal community consultations.
Specifically, the Northern Territory Government would like to see housing, economic participation
and justice as priority areas for the refresh of Closing the Gap.

5.

Regional development policies and enhancing local
workforce skills

Commonwealth regional development policies would benefit from establishing a quality database to
facilitate access to potential investors, businesses and government to address the knowledge gaps
and to help promote the potential untapped assets available to support economic development
across the regions. An established quality data base will facilitate better informed investment and
business project decision-making which will enable investments to be appropriately planned to
maximise opportunity for successful outcomes and mitigate identified risks early.
Regional development policies may consider and establish solutions to address the limited supply
chain infrastructure to enable economic development opportunities in regional/remote areas and the
centralisation of services (particularly private sector) to major population centres which impacts on
the widening inequalities between communities.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 3 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
Regional development policies should consider the Northern Territory’s unique characteristics to
mitigate identified risks and improve implementation, such as:


smaller and highly dispersed population with a large proportion living in regional and remote
areas spread across vast geographical distances



a majority of unsealed roads become affected by wet season conditions resulting in access to
communities and residents being cut off, further isolating communities and businesses, and



long distances and poor economies of scale result in expensive freight costs for communities
in regional and remote locations so access to goods or services are restricted and costs to
transport produce to markets relatively higher.

Effective regional policies will enable the Northern Territory Government to support and encourage
greater private sector investment to the Northern Territory to establish new economic opportunities.
The high cost of living and services in remote areas is not adequately covered by zonal taxation
offsets, and therefore wages have to be increased which itself has a multiplying effect on the costs
of living in a remote region. This also impacts through the high cost of rents. Not only are building
costs higher than in more populated areas, but investment in property in a regional town is inherently
more risky, as the economy of that town can fluctuate with the fortunes of a few businesses. Rental
costs therefore tend to be much higher than the equivalent cost of house ownership.
There is a shortage of skilled people for employment, and particularly lack of a sustainable supply of
skilled people. In some professions in small towns, the difference between an adequate supply and
none would be the loss of one or two people.
A factor increasing staff instability is that staff tend to be younger. Even if a staff member has a
satisfactory work life and good conditions, their stability is often upset by relationships, partners not
finding suitable work or not choosing to live in a remote or regional area. Schooling (lack of choice
and options) and shortage of child care also impact on staff retention.
For most businesses, access to town water and mains electricity are a pre-requisite. Having to supply
their own water and electricity infrastructure makes the development of businesses on remote sites
unviable in most cases.
The Northern Territory Government continues to build local workforce skills in regional and remote
communities, with a focus on upskilling, training and education for local people to build community
capacity.
To enhance local workforce skills in regional remote areas of the Northern Territory, there must be
improved access to communication technology and infrastructure to support effective online
education and training services readily available in larger townships.
Consistent and reliable communications infrastructure is a costly factor for business and industry in
regional and remote areas, without the same level of access that east coast Australians enjoy – this
limits application of technology and impedes efficiency gains.
A key consideration for the residents living in rural and remote communities is to access employment
and training opportunities throughout the year that will allow them to continue to develop and build
current skills through ongoing workforce participation.
The Northern Territory workforce in regional and remote communities could benefit from initiatives
that support a mobilised workforce to allow workers to move between areas of low employment and
economic activity to places where there are more jobs and skills development which are not readily
available where they live.
Transport connectivity, particularly airline connections, can be a significant business impediment
both for travel and freight purposes.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 4 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia

6.

Infrastructure

The Northern Territory’s small and dispersed population, long distances, geographic make-up, and
climatic extremes impacts on the cost, quality and availability of transport infrastructure and services
across the Territory. Passenger and freight services are critical for the Territory’s economic and
social wellbeing and growth, and are vital to support efforts to close the gap on Aboriginal
disadvantage for remote Territorians.
In particular, Aboriginal Territorians living in remote areas are faced with significant challenges in
accessing essential services and opportunities due to limited transport services and the high cost of
services when they exist. This creates transport disadvantage for the Territory’s Aboriginal
population, 80% of which live outside the greater Darwin area, and a transport inequality between
remote and non-remote areas.
While some major remote communities have access to some essential social support services,
others have access to only very limited or no services. Transport services are therefore relied on by
remote Aboriginal Territorians to receive or get to education, health, justice and welfare services, or
to access employment or social, cultural and recreational opportunities.
Only 25% of the Northern Territory’s vast 36 000 kilometre road network is sealed. The condition of
many roads means that any improvement works need to start from a very low infrastructure base.
Work to improve the quality of the road network is required to improve accessibility for remote
Territorians and enable them to receive an equitable level of service as their urban counterparts, as
well as to provide viable transport connections that enable businesses to be established and
maintained in regional and remote areas.
Many remote communities are cut off for a number of months every year when roads are cut or
access is limited due to flooding. During these times, air services are relied on to transport people
and essential freight. For the Territory’s island communities, air services are relied on year-round to
transport people, and barge services to transport freight.
For remote Territorians, some of the transport service challenges faced include a lack of access to
vehicles and/or maintenance facilities, the high cost of fuel, the high cost of goods due to the cost of
freight, a lack of public transport and high cost of commercial transport services when they are
available. These high transport service costs are attributable to long distances and low levels of
demand due to a small population, leading to reduced economies of scale. Further adding to higher
costs is the need for increased infrastructure maintenance and capital expenditure, more robust
vehicles, and more frequent vehicle maintenance and fleet replacement, due to unsealed roads, a
harsh climate and challenging geography. In addition, the aviation industry in particular is also faced
with the high cost of regulatory compliance which adds to the cost of travel for remote Territorians.
Given the challenges with delivering transport and logistics infrastructure and supporting transport
services, the Northern Territory Government will need to continue to partner with the
Commonwealth Government to fund programs to provide equitable access for remote Territorians.
There is a critical need for wider social benefits to be considered when assessing infrastructure
investment to ensure remote projects are not disadvantaged. Traditional economic cost benefit
analysis greatly disadvantages the Northern Territory’s efforts to improve critical infrastructure,
particularly when remote projects are competing for funding against high population urban areas.
Infrastructure investments in built up urban environments should not be compared to infrastructure
investments in remote – they will never compare favourably for remote Australia.
The recently developed White Paper on Developing Northern Australia has recognised the
opportunity to address the lack of developments by past governments with respect to establishing
freight routes to facilitate economic development opportunities with more competitive and improved
access to international and domestic markets.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 5 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
The majority of the prospective areas currently being targeted for development opportunities such
as mineral exploration are usually remote and difficult to access. Improving networks and
infrastructure that would provide year round heavy vehicle road access to provide the link between
developments and markets.
The rollout plan for the National Broadband Network (NBN) is fundamentally inequitable and the
impacts of this inequity are disproportionately high in the Northern Territory, as the below comparison
table for the percentage of population to receive NBN by service delivery mode highlights.
Fixed line

Fixed Wireless

Satellite

Australia

91%

6%

3%

Northern Territory

65%

6%

29%

Only major urban centres in the Northern Territory will receive a suitable standard service. There are
39 remote Northern Territory communities that have optic fibre connections to the national
telecommunications network that are still being required to use an inferior satellite service.
The Northern Territory Government has provided submissions to Australian Government Joint
Standing Committee Inquiries on the National Broadband Network in rural and regional areas in
2017 and 2018.
Two relevant quotes from these submissions are


Telecommunications services have become increasingly critical and underpin the delivery of
essential health and education services, social interaction and business and economic
development. It is therefore essential that access to the internet is available equitably to all
Australians and maintained to a level that creates no disadvantage regardless of location
(March 2017).



Almost half of the 29% of Territorians relegated to satellite services do not have mobile phone
access meaning they have no alternative internet access, even using costly mobile phone data
(March 2018).

The Northern Territory Government has lobbied NBN Co (board and management) and the
Commonwealth Government on many occasions on this matter.
The Northern Territory Government will continue to strongly advocate for disadvantaged families and
businesses living and working in remote areas of the Northern Territory to receive fair, equitable and
reasonable services.
Recognising that reliable and affordable telecommunications services provide significant social and
economic benefits, the Northern Territory Government has been proactive in the provision of
telecommunications infrastructure to remote communities. The current co-investment agreement
with Telstra is a four year, $24 million program to deliver mobile phone and fixed line broadband
coverage to remote communities, transport corridors and tourist destinations in the Northern
Territory.

Inequality Examples




A large pastoral property approximately 160 kilometres north of Alice Springs has access only
to satellite broadband because of its location. The property relies on broadband for numerous
activities including sales, accounting, employment of regular and itinerant workers,
accommodation enquiries and tourism venture bookings.
According to the managers, satellite broadband suffers from reliability issues three to four days
a week ranging from partial to complete outages. A change in Retail Service Provider (RSP)

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 6 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia





7.

did little to alleviate these issues indicating that the satellite infrastructure is the underlying
cause of the outages.
A rapidly growing fish farm 60 kilometres from Darwin seeking broadband access for the
IT systems supporting their business. Despite having fibre to their driveway, an initial quotation
from a service provider for a fibre installation was approximately $300 000.
Even more frustrating was the lack of business account availability for the NBN satellite service
and a lack of response from any Retail Service Providers generally to their enquiries. The
result is a multi-million dollar and rapidly expanding business running their internet business
on a 3G cellular connection with all of the associated bandwidth, expense and data download
problems that occur.

Education

The Northern Territory demographic, low population density and large number of remote and very
remote Aboriginal communities provides a distinctive set of challenges in delivering quality,
accessible education to all students within a reasonable distance from their home. Northern Territory
student characteristics differ vastly from the national average:

NT

Australia

Aboriginal student population

40%

3%

Under 15 years population

22%

19%

Remote/very remote population

45%

3%

23.1%

11.1%

Developmentally vulnerable at age 5
(2 or more Australian Early Development Census domains)

There are a number of complex and inter-related factors which affect Aboriginal student engagement
and achievement in school, both within the scope of education delivery and beyond. For example,
less than one third of Aboriginal adults in the Northern Territory have attended school beyond Year
10. From early childhood onwards, parental health and wellbeing, parental employment and levels
of educational attainment, the home living environment, and attendance in early childhood education
form an important platform for future learning and engagement.
Further, research by the Northern Territory Government shows that on any one day, approximately
20 per cent of Aboriginal students in very remote communities may be ‘out of community’. Students
who are highly mobile, have lower attendance levels, do not speak English at home, struggle to
access stable and secure housing, or experience overcrowding, and/or who experience health
problems, struggle to achieve their educational potential.
Despite significant investment and considerable effort by communities and governments, there
remains a gap in educational outcomes for Aboriginal students. By Year 3, Aboriginal students in
remote Northern Territory communities are two years of schooling behind Aboriginal students in
remote communities in other states and territories. This gap widens to about five years by Year 9.
The Index of Community Socio-Educational Advantage[4] (ICSEA) is a school-level measure of
relative advantage or disadvantage that a student population brings to a school. The measure is
based on the education and employment of students’ parents, but the school location (remoteness

[4]

More information on ICSEA is provided at: http://docs.acara.edu.au/resources/About_icsea_2014.pdf

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 7 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
level) and the proportion of Aboriginal students are also factors. The index is strongly correlated with
school achievement levels.
Although ICSEA is correlated with achievement, it is not an indication of the quality of teaching or
the potential of individual students. It is possible for a low ICSEA school to be high achieving and for
a student to excel in a low achieving school. The average ICSEA score for schools nationally is
approximately 1000, however only schools in Major Cities have an average score above this level.
Average ICSEA scores for schools drop significantly with each increasing remoteness category[5].
Darwin, the least remote area in the Northern Territory, is Outer Regional which is two categories
more remote than the Major Cities category.

Table 1: Schools Index of community socio-educational advantage by remoteness
category
Remoteness
Category

Number of
Schools
Aust

Average ICSEA

NT

Aust

NT

Major Cities

4565

-

1043

-

Inner
Regional

2214

-

983

-

Outer
Regional

1412

54

951

967

Remote

291

35

927

797

Very Remote

244

81

782

627

8726

170

1002

770

Total

Source: ACARA 2018 My School Data Set

For schools in the Northern Territory, the average ICSEA for both remote and very remote schools
is significantly lower than for schools from the rest of Australia with the same remoteness category.
Ninety per cent of schools nationally have an ICSEA over 900, so the scores of 797 and 627 for
Northern Territory remote and very remote schools respectively represent extreme levels of
disadvantage.
A Commonwealth Grants Commission research paper[6] identified attributes impacting on the cost
required to provide a standard level of education service, via regression analysis of ACARA data.
Higher costs were associated with Aboriginal students, students in remote areas and communities
where smaller schools are required. A finding of the analysis was that the Northern Territory would
need to spend nearly double the national average to provide the same standard of education service.
It is more difficult to attract and retain high quality educators in regional areas and the difficulty is
exacerbated with increasing remoteness. Furthermore, it is difficult for regional educators to access
other professionals and participate in professional development. The factors include travel costs,
extra time, and reduced ability to cover workloads in small school environments.

[5]
[6]

The ABS 2016 Australian Statistical Geography Standard Remoteness Structure
What States Do – School Education; CGC Research Paper; CGC 2016-15-S, September 2016.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 8 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
In large areas with low density populations schools are large distances apart and small in size. In
addition to the increased cost required to maintain a small school, other issues include difficulties in
providing: a diversity of subjects; flexibility for class separation; extra-curricular activities; and any
non-essential facilities. The average size of schools in outer regional areas is 222 students compared
to 548 in major cities nationally. In the Northern Territory the average school size is 219, however
there are some schools with less than 10 students.
Table 2: School Size by remoteness category for Australia and the Northern Territory
Number of
Average
Remoteness
Schools
Enrolment
Category

Aust

Major Cities

5026

Inner
Regional

2337

Outer
Regional

NT

Aust

NT

-

548

-

-

308

-

1488

62

222

385

Remote

316

40

152

210

Very
Remote

298

88

100

107

9465

190

410

219

Total

Source: ACARA 2018 My School Data Set

In regional areas with low population density, the logistics, costs and time of travel to and from school
are issues compared to the metropolitan context.
High levels of mobility and transience are characteristic of the regional Northern Territory
population and this impacts on the difficulty in being able to provide a standard level of education.
High mobility has an impact on student connection to school, gaps in attendance, learning
discontinuity, curriculum gaps and reduced retention through schooling. John Hattie found student
mobility to be the single highest negative effect on academic performance.
The difficulties regional areas face in providing a high standard of education contributes to a
“brain-drain” effect, with more-able people taking opportunities to leave. Education is a driver for this
brain-drain with families leaving the Northern Territory for children to attend more prestigious schools
and universities. In the Northern Territory it is also common for some families to send children to
interstate boarding schools.
In 2013, the former Northern Territory Government commissioned an independent review of
Aboriginal education in the Northern Territory which was undertaken by Mr Bruce Wilson. The review
report, A share in the future – Review of Indigenous Education in the Northern Territory, provided a
comprehensive description of the issues affecting Aboriginal education, particularly for students in
remote and very remote communities.
The report recommended a coherent strategic program across all years of schooling, and
emphasised the need for long-term planning and sustained resourcing to gain significant

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 9 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
improvement in outcomes for Aboriginal students.
The Northern Territory Government’s response to the review is the 10-year Indigenous Education
Strategy 2015-2024 (‘the Strategy’), which identifies five focus areas:






Foundations: Early childhood programs from birth to the start of full-time schooling;
Essentials: Structured literacy and numeracy programs in the primary years;
Pathways: Secondary education provision in regional and urban schools and the provision of
workplace literacy and numeracy programs;
Engagement: Opportunities for students, families and communities to have purposeful
engagement in education, including transition points, for improved outcomes in student
attendance, well-being and achievement; and
Workforce: A comprehensive workforce strategy to provide skills and support required to
improve educational outcomes.

The Strategy forms the basis for joint deliberation between the Northern Territory and
Commonwealth governments, particularly in relation to the National Partnership Agreement on
Remote Aboriginal Investment Schooling Implementation Plan (formerly Stronger Futures) funding,
and provides a structure for the coordination of investments in Aboriginal education by both
governments.
Stage 1 (2015-2017) of the Strategy outlined 25 key actions across all program elements considered
to have a direct and measurable effect on education outcomes for Aboriginal students. The strategy
has now entered Stage 2 (2018-2022), which will focus on the consolidation of activity across the
elements and work towards embedding program delivery to mainstream departmental practice.
Both the Wilson review and the first three years of implementation of the Strategy have confirmed
that there are no silver bullets for improving the education outcomes for Aboriginal students,
particularly in remote and very remote communities. The Northern Territory Government maintains
that the pathway to better outcomes requires quality programs, strong community relationships,
professional development and support for staff, and a consistent focus on measurable outcomes.

8.

Decentralisation

The reduction in the number of Commonwealth employees working in Darwin and other
Northern Territory centres directly undermines Northern Territory Government efforts to develop a
diverse ecology of jobs in the Northern Territory. Recent examples of this include the Australian
Electoral Commission (AEC) achieving efficiencies of $1.5 million in 2017-18 ($8.4 million over the
forward estimates) by restructuring the AEC Northern Territory office, reducing the AEC's physical
presence and delivering some services from Queensland. This equates to a reduction of AEC's
Northern Territory workforce by 13 positions.
To put this matter in a broader context, in addition to the AEC changes, over the last six years the
Commonwealth Government has reduced its footprint in the Northern Territory by closing the Darwin
office of the Australian Taxation Office (2015), halved CSIRO's workforce and reduced the
permanent Australian Defence Force (ADF) workforce in the Northern Territory. The 20 per cent
reduction of numbers of Army personnel, mostly within 1 Brigade, equated to a loss of almost 1200
permanent ADF personnel, which when families are taken into account, represents a loss of
approximately 2500 members of the Northern Territory community.
The Northern Territory Government is keen to work with the Commonwealth Government on the
policies outlined in Regions 2030. One way forward for both Governments is to work in partnership
to secure new opportunities for decentralised government activity. However, it is critical that the
Commonwealth Government cease using reductions in its presence in regional and remote Australia
to achieve budget savings.

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 10 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
Given the challenge of moving existing positions to the Northern Territory, the Northern Territory
Government recommends the Commonwealth Government undertake and publish regional impact
assessments for all future proposals to reduce staff numbers in the Northern Territory. The
Northern Territory Government also recognises that the Commonwealth has offset some of the lost
positions by establishing a Northern Territory presence for the National Disability Insurance Scheme
and transferring the Office of Northern Australia to Darwin.
The Northern Territory Government welcomes the Commonwealth Government’s renewed interest
in decentralising the administration of their departments, entities and functions. This is very much in
keeping with the commitments given in their White Paper on Developing Northern Australia.
As the Developing the North White Paper states, Northern Australia has its own innovative and
solutions based governance arrangements — both government and non-government — to manage
issues that are prominent in the region. These issues include:






Indigenous affairs with a focus on new and flexible governance arrangements in regional and
remote localities;
regional development based on shared priorities, policies and investment opportunities;
improving health care outcomes, especially for residents of Indigenous communities and in a
manner that builds the capacity of the local health workforce;
border and quarantine control; and
preparedness for disasters anywhere in either Northern Australia or our near neighbours.

As its first priority, the Commonwealth Government should commit to making no further reductions
to its existing employment footprint in the Northern Territory. The Commonwealth should look to
reopening or re-expanding offices that it has either closed or downsized in recent years. This would
include reopening the Australian Tax Office and expanding the role of the Darwin office of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and re-investing in the CSIRO’s Darwin and Alice Springs
research facilities.
A number of functions associated with the Indigenous Affairs portfolio should be based in those
jurisdictions that have the most significant challenges to manage. The most senior bureaucrats with
responsibility for Indigenous Affairs need to be accessible to the people most impacted by their work.
There are multiple Government entities involved in managing various aspects of the Indigenous
Affairs portfolio that should be headquartered in the Northern Territory. The NT Government notes
the Budget 2018 announcement that some positions within ORIC headquarters will be relocated to
Darwin and believes that headquartering ORIC in Darwin would demonstrate it has both the intention
and the capacity to work with the many Indigenous organisations operating across Northern
Australia.
Other Commonwealth controlled functions and organisations that should be managed from the
Northern Territory include the Indigenous Cadetship Support scheme, Aboriginal Hostels Limited,
Indigenous Land Corporation, Indigenous Business Australia, the Australian Institute of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Studies and the National Native Title Tribunal.
The Northern Territory Government would encourage larger Commonwealth agencies giving
consideration to moving some of their more niche functions to the Northern Territory as a mechanism
for sustaining their presence in the Territory. For example, the Department of Human Services might
transfer administration of the Australian Immunisation Register, the Centrelink Confirmation
eServices program, the Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme, the Australian Organ Donor Register and
all the programs aimed at supporting remote Australians. By transferring the Doctor Connect
program, telephone health advisory service and/or the Hearing Help program to the Territory, the
Department of Health will bolster the Northern Territory’s health sector.
Smaller agencies such as the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research that work
almost exclusively with our near neighbours could be re-located to Darwin with little difficulty. Given
NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 11 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
the scale of Defence’s presence in the Northern Territory, the Australian Civil-Military Centre could
usefully be transferred to Darwin where its role in preparing for and responding to conflicts and
disasters overseas would undoubtedly be enhanced. Similarly, the Department of the
Attorney-General could sensibly relocate resources used to prepare for national and international
disasters to Darwin as part of a coordinated program of disaster preparation and management.
The Northern Territory is the obvious place to headquarter those agencies that protect our borders
and sustain Australia’s quarantine regime. Commonwealth Government functions associated with
managing the marine environment, including programs aimed at dealing with marine pollution issues
would be a good fit for Darwin. Other programs run by the Department of the Environment and
Energy such as Hazardous Waste Management and the National Pollution Inventory can be
managed from Darwin or Alice Springs.

Summary Table of Commonwealth Government agencies, entities and
functions suited to transfer to the Northern Territory
Agency

Business Unit or Program

Aboriginal Hostels Limited

Headquarters functions

Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research

Headquarters functions

Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission

Product Safety Australia

Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Studies

Entire institute

Department of Communication and the Arts

All program functions and staff that relate to
Indigenous arts and languages

Department of Employment

Indigenous Cadetship Support
Doctor Connect

Department of Health

Health advice service
Hearing Help
Australian Immunisation Register
Centrelink Confirmation eServices for
businesses

Department of Human Services

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme
Australian Organ Donor Register
Programs that support rural and remote
Australians

Department of Immigration and Border
Protection

Border Watch

Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development

Regional Development Australia

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 12 of 13

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 92

Northern Territory Government Response to the Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality in Australia
Agency
Department of the Attorney General

Business Unit or Program
Programs and agencies associated with
disaster management
Hazardous Waste Management
National Pollutant Inventory

Department of the Environment and Energy

Programs that address marine pollution
issues
Programs that address species profile and
threat issues

Department of Veteran Affairs

Australian Civil-Military Centre

Indigenous Business Australia

Indigenous Business Australia

Indigenous Land Corporation

Indigenous Land Corporation

National Native Title Tribunal

National Native Title Tribunal

NORTHERN TERRITORY GOVERNMENT
15 May 2018

Page 13 of 13

