Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

Summary:
My name is Julie Walsh. I’m from Moora, Western Australia and this is my submission to the
Senate Economics Reference Committee in regards to “Regional Inequality in Australia”.
I am writing on behalf of myself as a resident and business owner in the town of Moora, WA
and also of other residents of the Moora Shire, farmers and small business owners of the
region and the Moora Shire Council.
The terms of reference I am addressing are:
(d) infrastructure and (e) education.
The Western Australian State government announced on the last day of school in December
2017 the Moora Residential College would close at the end of the 2018 school year.
The College is a government funded boarding house for regional students attending the
Central Midlands Senior High School ( CMSHS). Students are from families who live in the
wider region who cannot access a high school nor afford boarding school education in Perth
( their only other option); who choose a small boarding college for personal reasons or
aboriginal students who have family in Moora.
My submission highlights my concerns about the negative impact this closure will have on
our immediate and broader regional community.
This closure will affect me, as well as our extended community, families, businesses,
government (local and federal) and individuals which I will outline below.
I am writing this submission from a position of some experience
1. My husband worked at the College for 4 years as a Supervisor and house Dad for the
students. These kids are still close friends, and return regularly to see us. We
understand the reasons parents send their kids to the college.
2. Our business relies substantially on the custom of both the families attending the
College, and the College itself sourcing sporting goods and materials from us, as well
as a large selection of our uniforms supply is to the students at the College.
3. I am a rural parent of children who have attended boarding school.
4. I am a business owner in a rural demographic immediately affected by this closure.
5. I employ valuable staff members who are being negatively impacted by this closure.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

Background - Moora Residential College
Moora Residential College (MRC) is situated in Moora, immediately adjacent to the Central
Midlands Senior High School, (CMSHS) and works closely with the school to provide a
quality boarding and educational experience for our students.

Moora is located 170km north of Perth and is
 the largest regional centre located between Perth and Geraldton
 only town between the two cities with a senior high school (ie: providing schooling
to year 12 level. A district high school only delivers to year 10).
Moora is a regional centre, and is also serviced by
 a district hospital,
 doctors’ surgery, ambulance
 Police Station
 two primary schools,
 most banks – very unusual for regional WA
 5 layers of aged care,
 A permanent regional physiotherapy Wellness Centre
 and various government agencies including Disability Services, CentreLink,
 Many clubs and organisations from Bowling, Horsemans, Arts & Aboriginal Progress
 Businesses from cafés, clothing, new car sales to butcher & grocery stores
Moora Residential College has the capacity for 50 students and provides a supportive and
personalised environment catering to student’s individual needs while fostering academic,
social, physical and personal development.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

The close relationship between college and school includes weekly liaison and a tutoring
program involving school staff.
The Moora business community rely on the school and Residential College to supply local
trainees and apprentices – mostly sourced through the Vocational Education Training
Scheme.
Students are encouraged to participate in a wide range of local sporting and community
activities. These include basketball, football, hockey, cricket, tennis, golf, pony club,
swimming club, netball, youth groups and church groups.
(Reference: MRC Annual report 2016)

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

What happened.
1. The previous State Government had earmarked $54m to upgrade three Residential
Colleges.
2. Moora was last college to be upgraded- the remainder of funds $8.7m.
3. Upon winning the March 2017 election, one of the new Government’s first actions
was to rescind this upgrade money from the College.
4. December 2017, the State Government announced it would be closing the
residential college quoting “budget repair” for the whole of the state.
Issues and anomalies
1. All reports to date have been written, quoted and costed based on the amount of
money allocated – no report has been done in isolation of the existing fund.
2. Of reports relating to costings and budgetary findings,
3. The Architects Report only was the result of a visit to the site.
4. All reports state the building needs an upgrade, but is structurally sound and safe for
use.
5. A recent upgrade of the electrical Safety fittings was completed in April 2018.
There are a total of 5 reports relating to the College:
1. 2012 Building Management Works Department building report – a standard report
on Government buildings, carried out every 5 years.
2. 2016 Previous Government’s Scope Report
3. 2017 May Architectural Upgrade Report
4. 2017 July Architectural Costings Report
5. 2018 BMW Report– not due until December 2018
The Residential College operates each year with
 Deficit Funding – approximately $313,000 pa
 Maintenance Budget – this amount is intended to be $175 000 per year for standard
maintenance.
Moora Residential College did not receive its budgeted maintenance allocation in 2017.
The College is well able to continue running for a minimum of another 3 years under the
current deficit funding and maintenance budget. This is a cost of approximately $525 000 a
year to keep the college open, running as it has been for the last ten years.
Should the Government close the College at the end of 2018, conservative estimates are in
excess of $1.4 million. This is an equivalent figure to the cost of keeping the college open for
the next 3 years.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

Impacts to Moora over two years.









If the residential college closes, I believe it will lead to approximately 600 people
leaving town over the next two years. This number is comprised of the
immediate loss of jobs from the school and the Residential College,
the loss of people and families associated with the students and employees who
leave the town to find new education facilities and employment.
The loss of long-term resident families of students aiming to reach Year 12 in their
schooling. There are currently families making arrangements to leave the town
forthwith, thus removing an estimate 5 people per family each time this happens.
Immediate loss of 30 student to the local Senior High School, with the potential for
that number to exceed a loss of 80 students over the stated period.
the high school will inevitably be downgraded from Senior High School, providing
face to face teaching up to year12, to a District High School providing education to
Year 10 only
A loss of teachers immediately thus a loss of subjects taught, already depleted
The loss of population will cause businesses will close, population will fall further,
jobs will be lost and become more scarce for those that remain, unemployment will
rise amongst those who stay, services will be lost due to “numbers”.

The impact on the below groups will be as follows;
Families:
1. higher expenses - locals will need to travel further to adjacent towns to access shops,
health care and services because local ones close (see why below).
2. Families will also have to decide to between sending their children to local school for
some years (7 to 10) and then send to a boarding school elsewhere for the final years
11 & 12 because the high school will inevitably end downgraded to a district high
school.
3. Children may be sent away to boarding school earlier so they can have continuous
year 7 to 12 education
4. OR more likely, the trend of women taking entire families out of the community to
access adequate education for their children will escalate. City options are too
expensive.
Businesses:
1. Less staff to draw from in the community as people move out of the area to be
closer to their kids.
2. Less population means less sales and thus closures. Businesses are already being
drastically affected, as people hold back, waiting to see the full effects of the

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

3.
4.

5.
6.

closures. My business is down almost 40% in the interim, and there are a number of
core town businesses struggling to meet wages commitments (Post Office, Liquor
Store, and Newsagency). These are long-term businesses, experienced in weathering
the dynamics of a country town.
Once young people leave the country, they rarely return.
Machinery dealers, car yards and heavy diesel mechanics are already struggling to fill
and hold trained positions, apprentices will be impossible to lure back to a rural
town, and these large businesses will be forced to move where there is a full
demographic of employees.
Without a high school mature staff will not come to Moora. This is already
happening.
New business willing to set up in new innovative industries on the boundaries of the
Shire chooses Moora for banks, hospital and education. They will go elsewhere.
There is significant activity committed but this will cease. ( see Economic Impact
Statement, Lucid Economics)

Local Government:
1. less population means less people buying or building houses which means less rates
(less local government income).
1. less skilled staff to actually work in the offices . As soon as their children reach high
school age, those who are able to move to the city to access stable, quality
education.
2. less residents to be local government councillors - those already there are
overworked with work, family, community and then significant Council
commitments.
Housing:
1. In a depressed housing market, a crash in the price of housing caused by the
immediate and unplanned exodus of a high proportion of the population will cause a
further significant slump in the housing prices. This will have an ongoing effect on
both those living here, as well as the future prospects of those leaving the area, and
relying on the proceeds of the sale of their main asset.
2. Less ability and willingness to improve and maintain current housing stock
Federal Government:
1. fewer businesses in town means less available jobs which means more people
drawing unemployment benefits.
2. Moora is a significant taxable revenue earner being in a safe agricultural zone. The
impact of no adequate schooling as a direct result of the closure of Moora College
will result in inability to gain and retains skilled staff. Young farmers with young
families – educated wives wanting good education for their children are at significant
disadvantage. They too will leave. The potential impact upon land ownership and
taxable income from efficient farming families may be significant and irreversible.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

Indigenous: Culturally, the indigenous population do not move away from their birth place.
There are certain acceptable areas they can move to, but none of the options offered by the
State Government are covered by the family areas of local Indigenous people. This means,
once the school is downgraded, there will be no higher education for any of the indigenous
students in the whole of Moora and surrounds. Currently, the school has a 25% indigenous
population.
Local Sporting Groups: less students and residents in the local area will lead to teams being
unable to field a side due to lack of players. Lack of businesses mean a smaller pool of
supporters and sponsors causing great financial strain on already stretched sporting club
budgets. Less population also means less volunteers to run these sporting organizations.
Individuals: the closure of the Moora Residential College will affect me by:
i.
I will lose long term employees who have children at High School. I will find
these long term employees almost impossible to replace – the knowledge of
the business, their involvement and engagement are irreplaceable. They are
like family to us.
ii.
I will lose a substantial amount of business – I estimate that I will lose 40%
more of turnover, and will more than likely go out of business, as this will be
unsustainable.
iii.
We are major sponsors of many sporting and community clubs, as well as
being major players on committees and works parties. The loss of these
sporting clubs will impact on our social integration enormously, and have a
dire effect on most of our friends, family and acquaintances.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

Barriers:




The government has incorrectly assumed the residential college is in disrepair and
requires $8.7 million to upgrade. In reality, the true cost is unknown as they will not
allow independent assessors on site to accurately quote and evaluate the true cost
of repairs. Local citizens in the building and construction industry have off the record
estimated true repairs to be in the region of $500,000.
State leaders and ministers have yet to visit the site even though multiple official and
social invitations have been extended. These include:
1. Shire of Moora request to State Government to visit site, and to hold
meetings in Moora.
2. P & C request to State Government to visit site and hold meetings in
Moora.
3. School Council request to State Government to visit site and hold
meetings in Moora.
4. Moora Chamber of Commerce request and invitations to various Minister
to visit Moora and College.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 93

My recommendations:
That the Economic Standing Committee use whatever influences it may have to address the
issues I have outlined with the West Australian State Government.
The impact of fiscal policies at state level on a significant regional centre will have long
lasting and serious impacts upon education and upon building human capital within our
region, let alone attracting skilled people to our farms and businesses. Diversity of skills and
lifestyles so readily a growth area given good technology is killed stone dead with no
adequate educational infrastructure that works seamlessly from Kindergarten to TAFE.
We have state of the art facilities underutilised. We have business and Local Government
willing and able to work together to achieve high aims increasing diversity of employment,
culture, age demographic creating a vibrant community into the future retaining our old
people, growing old with their extended families in situ.
With good education, hanging perilously in the balance with the seemingly innocuous
closure of one small residential college, we can see our community thrive and innovate.
Without this small but key piece of infrastructure our ability to innovate and attract those
we need is stymied.
I would like to see
a) the residential college open and operating with certainty for at least the next five
years
b) Allow local Shire and P & C to have an independent building inspection carried out to
determine the actual costs of renovation and refurbishment
c) For the Federal Government to adopt a policy of equity of education for all –
including those in rural Western Australia
d) To maintain the Boarding Away from Home Allowance
e) To assist with tax measures, those people who have to send their children away for
quality education, remembering that Country Children are the most likely group to
return with skills and expertise and passion to living in rural areas;
f) Adjust policy settings to reflect that rural Western Australia has very different needs
to anywhere else in Australia
g) When Policy is adopted to affect a group in Regional WA, please consult with those
who live here before it is enacted into legislation
I authorize the use and publication of my submission.
Regards
Julie Walsh

