Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 94

Monday, April 30, 2018
Senate Standing Committees on Economics
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra
ACT 2600
Dear Sir,
I became aware of the Senate inquiry as a result of my involvement as an elected
member of the Wattle Range Council.
I have lived in regional South Australia since 1981 after gaining employment at the
Council as a Building Inspector and Health Surveyor. While Penola has been a wonderful
place to live, work and raise a family, I have found that there are some difficulties that
residents of regional Australia have to contend with, which people living in the City do
not have to face.
Medical.
A major problem is access to medical facilities, especially for those who live in small
towns such as Penola. I am a member of the local Lions Club, and our Club has
endeavored to alleviate this problem by operating a weekly bus service from Penola to
Mount Gambier to enable those without private transport to get to medical and
business appointments as well as do their shopping and visiting friends. For many
residents, this is the only transport available and has only been made possible because
volunteers drive the bus. There is however, a modest cost to all people who use this
service.
In the city of Adelaide concessional taxi fares are available as well as free public
transport for seniors.
Lack of medical facilities and transport has become a personal issue for myself. Four
years ago I was affected by an eye disease, known as Wet Macula Degeneration, which
initially caused me to lose the ability to read with my right eye. At the time, I was
fortunately able to get an immediate appointment with an Ophthalmologist, Dr. Trevor
Hodgson, who had developed and Eye Clinic in Mount Gambier, only fifty kilometers
from my home.
Following a series of injections directly into my eye, my sight was has been restored to
the point where I can read again with the affected eye.
Unfortunately, Dr. Hodgson has had to close his Eye Clinic due to the Mount Gambier
Hospital only allowing one Ophthalmologist to operate at the hospital. Dr. Hodgson took

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 94

this matter up with the South Australian Health Commission and Members of the South
Australian Parliament but nothing could be resolved. The issued also featured in the
local media but we were unable to alter the State Government’s position.
As a result of Eye Clinic closing, I now have to travel over 400 kilometers to have eye
treatment every three or four months. (The only other Ophthalmologist in close
proximity to my residence is not taking on any new patients.)
This lack of regional medical care, has direct costs to us, as follows;
a) Time for my wife and myself, as I cannot see to drive, following the injections.
b) Fuel costs for an 800 km round trip.
c) Accommodation.
d) The Ophthalmologist in the city is much more expensive that Dr. Hodgson.
The Patient Assistant Scheme (PATS) has been of some assistance, however the
guidelines are quite restrictive and as we have family in Adelaide we like to take
advantage of spending a short time with them in conjunction with the medical
treatment. When we take a few extra days we become ineligible for PATS funding.
Transport.
Transport from regional centers to capital cities in a major cost and I would like to
suggest that all permanent residents in regional Australia be given limited free
transport to the capital cities, especially for those traveling for medical reasons.
My reasoning is that;
a) I see buses traveling to and from the city, which are usually less than half full.
b) Even as a Senior, it costs about the same for fuel as a concession bus fare for
one person and if there are two traveling together by car, it is much cheaper that
a double concession bus fare.
C) It is a complete waste of natural resources to have a half empty bus, only
because it is cheaper and more convenient to use a car to travel to the same
destination.
The pension and asset test.
It is my opinion that there is significant inequality between Australians who choose to
live in Regional Australia and those who live in the city.
In Saturday’s Advertiser, it was reported that the median home value in Adelaide is
$470,000 and as we know, the family home is excluded from the asset test when
applying for an aged pension. I don’t know the median value of houses in regional

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 94

Australia, however, my recent observation is that many of the houses in areas
surrounding where I live, are selling for about $100,000.
From my understanding of the asset test, the family with the $470,000 house in the city
and the one with the $100,000 house in country could each have $400,000 in
superannuation and get the full pension. If however, the family with the $100,000 home
had $770,00 in superannuation, or other assets, they would get virtually no pension.
(Even though their net financial worth may be the same as the city dweller)
For this reason I believe that it would be much more equitable if the family home was
included as part of the asset test.
On a personal level I am fortunate to have a very pleasant home in which to live and if it
were in the city I am sure that it would be at or above the median home value in
Adelaide. But according to the Valuer General’s Department, my home is only about half
the Adelaide median value.
As I have children and grandchildren living in Adelaide I am often tempted to sell up
and move closer to my family. On the other hand my children and grandchildren love
coming home where they can enjoy the fresh country air and the freedom to enjoy the
open spaces.
If I were to decide now to move to the city, I could afford to buy a home of median value,
in one of the outer suburbs. However, if I leave it for ten years, I will not be able to
afford a home of median value in the city.
The reason that I won’t be able to afford to move in ten years time is that I currently
can’t get any pension because my assets other than my home exclude me form getting a
pension.
The assets that I do have, excluding my home, is a small house, which we use as a bed
and breakfast and a partly completed beach house in Robe and a small amount of
superannuation.
The city dweller with the same value of assets that I currently have, will be eligible for a
$30,000 aged pension. Meanwhile, I am ineligible for a pension and will have to spend
the equivalent amount, $30,000, for living expenses, firstly from my superannuation
and then from the sale of one or both of our properties. Ultimately, this will make it
impossible to move back to the city to be close to family, because all my assets will have
been used for general living expenses.
I don’t believe that this situation is equitable and would therefore like to see the family
home included in asset test.
Thank you for considering the impact of regional inequality in Australia.
Yours sincerely
Dean Burrow.

