Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

Hay Shire Council
PO Box 141
134 Lachlan Street
HAY NSW 2711
Phone: 02 6990 1118
Fax: 02 6993 1288

Submission to the Senate Inquiry into the Indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in
Australia
I am making this submission on behalf of Hay Shire Council. Hay is a small town in the south-western
Murray-Riverina region of NSW. The town itself is defined, under the Australian Statistical Geography
Standard (ASGS) Remoteness Structure, as Outer Regional and the rest of the Local Government Area
is defined as Remote. The 2016 census indicated a population of 2,946 and the Shire has a SEIFA
score of 922 in 2016 and a rank in Australia of 126.
Hay is around 150km from the regional hubs of Deniliquin and Narrandera and 200 km from the
Victorian border.
The community of Hay experiences unequal access to opportunities and unequal outcomes,
particularly with regard to access to training and employment opportunities, health and transport
inequalities. In particular Hay suffers from inequalities in health, finance and transport.
The attached publication by the Regional Australia Institute – ‘Pillars of Communities – Service delivery
professionals in small Australian towns 1981 – 2011’ includes a case study on pages 24 – 25 about the
health and transport inequalities faced by the Hay community.
The case study concludes that ‘research shows, a lack of access to GPs, dentists, pharmacies and
other primary health facilities for rural and remote individuals in Australia is estimated to result in more
than 60,000 preventable hospitalisations every year.’
The Australian Medical Association’s Position Statement – Rural Workforce Initiative 2017 (attached)
acknowledges that the 7 million Australians living in regional, rural and remote areas ‘have more
difficulty accessing health services than urban Australians leading them to have a lower life expectancy
and worse outcomes on leading indicators of health.
Death rates in regional, rural, and remote areas (referred to as ‘rural’ in this document unless otherwise
specified) are higher than in major cities, and the rates increase in line with degrees of remoteness.
People living in rural areas are more likely to defer access to general practitioners (GPs) due to cost.
Rural patients often have to travel significant distances for care, or endure a long wait to see a GP close
to where they live. They have higher rates of potentially preventable hospitalisations, and are less likely
to gain access to aged care.The closure and downgrading of rural hospitals is seriously affecting the
future delivery of health care in rural areas. For example, more than 50 per cent of small rural maternity
units have been closed in the past two decades in Australia.
Although Australia currently has an adequate supply of doctors nationally, there remains a significant
medical workforce shortage in rural areas. Many locally trained doctors are choosing not to work in rural
areas and nearly 76% of graduating domestic students reported living in capital cities in the Medical
Students Outcome Database Survey (MSOD). Research has shown that although GPs are more likely
to practice in rural locations than other specialisations, the growth in the specialist medical workforce
has outstripped the growth in GP numbers so that specialists now make up a larger proportion of the

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

overall medical workforce. The rural medical workforce is reliant on internationally trained medical
graduates.
Table 1: Full-time equivalent medical practitioners per 100,000 population
Remoteness Area
Medical Practitioners per 100,000 population
Major City
437
Inner Regional
292
Outer regional
272
Very remote
264
Table is replicated from Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2016. Australia’s health 2016.
Australia’s health series no. 15. Cat. No. AUS 199. Canberra: AIHW.’
Health is not a function of local government, but in 2012, when Council secured the services of the
Tristar Medical Group to Hay the Council had expended some $1 million of community funds to assist
the State and Federal Governments in carrying out their responsibilities. In the 6 years that Tristar
operated in Hay, the costs to Council of rental subsidies for the Medical Centre, and two houses, plus
the costs of providing three cars for the doctors has been around an additional $300,000.
Part of the commitment Tristar made in entering into a tenancy agreement with Hay Shire Council in
2012 was that the General Practice operating from the Hay Medical Centre would also provide services
as Visiting Medical Officer (VMO) at the adjacent Hospital. This never eventuated and the decision was
made to cease Tristar’s tenancy agreement and bring in a new GP who would also provide the VMO
service. The Tristar Medical Group has offered to transfer 5,000 records of Hay patients back to Council
at $20 per record or a total cost of $100,000.
In response to questions from Federal MP Sussan Ley, the Health Minister The Hon. Greg Hunt
responded:
‘The Department has confirmed that there is currently no Australian legislation that prohibits a General
Practitioner from charging patients for the transfer of their medical records to an alternative medical
practice. General Practices in Australia operate as private businesses and it is business decision
whether they seek to levy an administrative cost.
Beyond the legal setting, the AMA Position Statement on patient access to medical records outlines that
doctors should be entitled to recover from the patient or from any other authorised person or authority
requesting information the reasonable cost of providing access.
It could be argued that Tristar are charging above what would be considered reasonable given the
electronic nature of the records – and that they inherited them free of charge in the first place.’
This health care model where General Practices in Australia operate as private businesses is not
working for rural and remote areas and could be seen as one of the causes of inequality between
regions, especially between capital cities and other regions.
Hay Shire Council has submitted a motion to the National Assembly of the Australian Local Government
Association to seek to find solutions:

2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

Proposed Motion from Hay Shire Council to the National General Assembly of Australian Local
Government
That the National General Assembly call for the Federal Health Minister urgently to form a joint task force
representing Local, State and Federal spheres of government, to formulate model financial packages for the
engagement of doctors in rural towns, and contribute to those financial packages.
In addition call for the Federal Health Minister to ensure that safeguards are in place to prevent GP practices from
appropriating patients’ medical records and making a profit out of transferring them to incoming practitioners, and to
advise councils on best practice legal agreements to secure the services needed and secure the patients’ records.
Objective
The Australian Medical Association (AMA) confirms that health in regional and remote Australia is a key area of
concern as people in those areas have a shorter lifespan than those in major cities because of the inadequate
access to local health services. In some areas local health services are only provided as a result of financial
support from local government. Funding and legal expertise are both a concern to ensure that effective health
services are provided, and the patients’ medical records are not used by outgoing practitioners to make a profit
from local communities.
Arguments
Effective health services must be appropriately funded and integrated with other services and programs to ensure
quality and consistency in service delivery. Best practice advice should be available to councils that have to step in
to provide support to secure local health services to ensure that the support provided does secure the services
needed, and the patients’ records are secured for transfer to future providers.

The NSW Government has acknowledged that councils in rural and remote areas have difficulty
achieving financial sustainability largely because of small populations over wider areas resulting in
difficulties in raising sufficient revenue. This was acknowledged by the Independent Local Government
Review Panel recommending a Rural Council model of reduced governance costs, and the NSW
Government initially adopted this concept in its Fit For The Future Program. However, this model was
subsequently withdrawn by the Government.
Hay Shire Council submitted a Rural Council proposal to show it was Fit For The Future, and it was
deemed to be fit in terms of scale and capacity as a rural council, but not fit on financial sustainability
because of its heavy reliance on Financial Assistance Grants and lack of opportunity to increase own
source revenue. Hay Shire Council was eventually deemed to be Fit For the Future in December 2016
after submitting a reassessment proposal.
The NSW Government also acknowledged the financial difficulties of rural and remote councils by
establishing the Far West initiative. Hay Shire Council is adjacent to the Far West region and sees
councils further west getting better funding from Programs like Stronger Country Communities and RMS
agency work. The NSW councils to the south of Hay were amalgamated and received considerable
funding as a result. Hay was not amalgamated because of its remoteness and now suffers significant
financial inequalities when compared with councils to the west, north, south and east!!
Under these circumstances of difficulties in achieving financial sustainability it is unfair for local
government to have to pick up and pay for the responsibilities of State and Federal Governments. As
stated earlier subsidising medical services cost Hay Shire Council $1.3 million up to 2018, and is
continuing to cost Council with subsidising the new General Practice and providing I.T. equipment for
the storage of medical records.
Using restricted Council funding to subsidise medical services reduces the amount available to employ
skilled staff who might be able to make a difference. Council is the grassroots level government that

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

provides most pro-active actions on the ground. With lack of funding, there will be lack of qualified staff,
and lack of long term strategic approaches to economic development.
Examples of solutions – provide better funding for councils in rural and remote areas as they are
the biggest part of the solution
Most funding applications in regional towns are completed and driven by local government. With lack of
qualified staff, this leads to less and lower quality of applications, with the resultant lower chance of
success.
Hay had experienced significant population decline and the population of the town has stabilised.
Reasons:
 Employment of experienced and qualified staff at the Local Government level, to analyse,
investigate and plan around the current economic trends.
 Actively marketing the town for its employment opportunities and investment opportunities.
 Growing its existing business with extensive on-the-ground involvement of Business Advisory
services such as the Business Enterprise Centre.
 Actively identifying and attracting large corporations to the region, and actively assisting them
through all government processes.
 Fast processing times of all business related Development Applications and Certificates. Hay
Shire Council has some of the fastest processing times in NSW.
 Being active in Tourism. Providing on-the-ground services and activities for visitors, in favour of
spending effort and funds on government liaison and events.
Hay Shire Council received a reduced level of Financial Assistance Grants in 2017/18. The use of land
values to estimate ability to pay by the NSW Local Government Grants Commission is detrimental to
Hay’s situation. Population decline in the Hay Shire is partly a result of the purchase at high values of
large tracts of agricultural land with water licences by corporate businesses, who replace families on the
land with one manager, or manage the properties remotely. The use of the SIEFA index of
disadvantage would better reflect Hay’s ability to pay.
The following tables demonstrate the comparison between Hay Shire and other NSW Councils in the
same category. This refers to the 2011 SEIFA index, but there is little change with the relative 2016
figures.
Financial Assistance Grant – Hay Shire Council
Lockhart
Walcha
Coolamon
Carrathool
Weddin
Warren
Bogan
Bourke
Balranald
Hay
Gilgandra
Coonamble

GPE p.c.
SEIFA Score

0

200

400

600

800

1000

4

1200

1400

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

The graph above compares all Councils in the Rural Agricultural Medium Category (RAM) showing General
Purpose Grant Entitlement per capita for 2017/18 compared with the 2011 SEIFA Scores. (Coonamble is the most
disadvantaged of these councils, and Lockhart the least). Balranald, Bourke, Bogan, Carrathool, and Lockhart all
have a 2017/18 General Purpose Entitlement per capita higher than Hay while being less disadvantaged.

Lockhart
Walcha
Coolamon
Carrathool
Weddin
Warren
Bogan
Bourke
Balranald
Hay
Gilgandra
Coonamble

LRE Prk
SEIFA Score

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

This graph shows the Local Road Entitlement for 2017/18 per kilometre of road against the 2011 SIEFA scores.
Coonamble, Gilgandra, Bogan, Warren and Walcha all have a higher Local Road Entitlement per kilometre than
Hay.
Lockhart
Walcha
Coolamon
Carrathool
Weddin
Warren
Bogan
Bourke
Balranald
Hay
Gilgandra
Coonamble

Total p.c.
SEIFA Score

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

This graph shows the total FAG Grants per capita for 2017/18 compared with the 2011 SEIFA Score. Gilgandra,
Balranald, Bourke, Bogan, Warren, Carrathool and Lockhart all receive higher total FAG grants per capita than
Hay.

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

Lockhart
Walcha
Coolamon
Carrathool
Weddin
Warren
Bogan
Bourke
Balranald
Hay
Gilgandra
Coonamble

Total grant per km2
SEIFA Score

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

This graph shows the total FAG grant per square kilometre of Council area. The only 2 Council areas receiving a
lower total FAG grant per square kilometre of council area than Hay are Bourke and Balranald. Lockhart,
Coolamon, Weddin and Gilgandra receive significantly more per sq. kilometre than Hay.

1400
1200
1000
800
2017-18

600

2015-16
400

2014-15

200
0

This graph shows the General Purpose Grant Entitlement per capita over the last 3 years. Hay and Lockhart are
the only two councils where the entitlement p.c. has dropped and they are at either end of the SEIFA disadvantage
scale. It is not clear why Balranald, Bourke and Carrathool receive significantly more than Hay and why they have
received such large increases in 2017/18 when Hay’s entitlement per capita has fallen.

6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

Transport inequalities are a major issue for the communities of Hay Shire, and the difficulties for the
local community in accessing services results in locational decisions being made to move away from
Hay thus adding to the spiral of population decline and removal of further services by the NSW
Government.
Distances from Hay to major centres:
Sydney
Melbourne
Canberra
Griffith
Wagga Wagga

758 kms
410 kms
520 kms
150 kms
275 kms

8 hours
4 hours
6 hours
2 hours
3 hours

The local community in Hay works hard to fill service gaps through voluntary and charitable effort.
There was a total of 227 community transport trips from August 2017 through to the end of February
2018, servicing 393 clients for specialist medical appointments out of town.
Destinations for this period included: Albury, Bendigo, Deniliquin, Echuca, Griffith, Mildura, Shepparton
and Wagga Wagga.
‘This service continues to be very busy, and has gained several new clients since the commencement of
2018. The biggest problem is having the amount of volunteers required for up to 13 out of town
destinations per week. Due to the fact that all the volunteer drivers are retirees, there are times when 5
out of 10 drivers are unavailable, which can affect service levels.’
The community raises significant sums for CAN Assist to help patients with cancer e.g. one event in Hay
in 2017 raised $140,000.
The charity Angel Flight provided the following flights from Hay for patients for medical appointments in
Sydney:
2013: 46
2014: 81
2015: 106

2016: 72
2017: 64
2018: 37 (to date)

As stated earlier Hay town itself is defined, under the Australian Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS)
Remoteness Structure, as Outer Regional and the rest of the Local Government Area is defined as
Remote.
Policy settings which could address inequality between regions should reconsider these
classifications of remoteness.
Remoteness Classification
 The Australian Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS) Remoteness Structure should be
applied for:
o Funding
o Resource allocation
o Exceptions to applying of non-essential legislation
o Exceptions to reporting requirements
 The remoteness classification for the Hay Urban Area is Outer Regional. This is the same as:
o Griffith
o Narooma
o Mildura

7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

A relaxation of the application of business legislation would assist rural and remote areas:
 A business with a multi-million dollar turnover in Sydney has to jump through the same hoops as
a business in Hay NSW.
 This is especially relevant with small family businesses in regional areas.
Hay Shire has had a heavy reliance on public sector employment with public administration, safety,
education and training and health care and social assistance representing some 28% of Hay Shire’s
employment in 2011 to 23% of employment in 2016 (a reduction in 40 public sector jobs), and this
seems to be mainly as a result of NSW State Government policies concerning the distribution of State
Agencies increasingly in larger population centres.
Views on the causes of inequality between regions, especially between capital cities and other
regions include the explanation given in the following conclusion:
The RAI case study referred to above concludes:
‘Communities like Hay 200km from major service centres keenly experience the limitations of a
model that relies on population measures to distribute service professionals. Under hub and
spoke service models, the part-time presence of a service representative provides ‘outreach’ to the
community. The intention of these visiting officers is to ‘plug’ any gap created by the town’s lack of full
time service professionals. Government departments can claim this part-time outreach program as a
‘local presence’ in a community. In Hay for example, a representative from the NSW government’s
Ageing, Disability and Home Care services is in the town for one day each fortnight doing ‘outreach’.
This professional is based in a nearby hub. Some have expressed concern that the time allocated for
Hay is insufficient for the officer to both provide services to townspeople and to liaise with local planners
about service delivery, especially if an issue involves other government departments.’
NSW Public Works has recently ceased to employ anyone at its office in Hay and has abandoned its
building and grounds which have been allowed to deteriorate noticeably when compared with the
adjacent Court House whose grounds are immaculately maintained up to the invisible line with the
Public Works grounds that is not marked by a fence.
Employment in the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Office has fallen to one part time administration
officer and this is indicative of the lack of active management of the National Parks in Hay Shire. There
are over 110,000 hectares of National Parks in the Hay LGA and the creation of these National Parks
reduced income from rates by over $100,000 p.a.
These National Parks are not being actively managed by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service
(NPWS). This has resulted in a significant increase in feral animals, noxious weeds, and bushfire
hazards, which have had serious impacts on neighbouring agricultural properties. In addition there has
been an increase in illegal hunting in these areas which has resulted in damage to farming properties.
Policy settings that could help address inequality between regions
The Grattan Institute in its 2011 report ‘Investing in Regions: Making a Difference’ asked the question:
What is regional development and how is it measured?
‘In this report we focus on the economic development of regions, as it is the underlying health of a
region’s economic base that sustains jobs and other activity into the future. Generally we measure
regional economic growth through growth in population, employment and average incomes.

8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95

While economic activity is commonly measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) or Gross State
Product (GSP) at a State level, no equivalent set of official statistics accounts for economic activity at a
regional level. However, economic growth is driven by the 3P’s - population, participation and
productivity. So population, employment growth, and average incomes are useful proxies for regional
economic growth.
These economic indicators are not the only things that matter. Just as a focus solely on GDP growth can
obscure other important aspects of national wellbeing such as social interaction or environmental
amenity, the wellbeing of a regional area is also much more than the region’s population growth rate.
Regional areas that are growing slowly, as measured by population, employment or income growth, are
not unattractive places to live or without economic opportunities. In fact, regional areas often score
more highly on other dimensions of wellbeing than larger cities, especially measures of social
interaction.
For example, over 80% of people in outer regional and remote areas of Australia felt part of their local
community, compared to 71% of people residing in major cities.’
Hay Shire has a productive agricultural sector which is an important part of the economy of Australia.
Hay is at the crossroads of the Cobb, Sturt and Mid-Western Highways and provides important services
to travelers between major centres who often stop to rest for the night in Hay.
Policy settings that could help address inequality would include:
 the reversal of the current model that relies on population measures to distribute service
professionals and provoke an honest conversation about what level of service
governments are prepared to fund in more remote areas given the important role they
play
 improved finding of local government as the mainstay of local communities.

Amanda Spalding
General Manager
Hay Shire Council
30th April 2018

9

