Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT

Rural Workforce Initiatives 2017
1.

Background and summary of current problems

About one third of Australia’s population, approximately 7 million people, live in regional, rural and
remote areas. These Australians often have more difficulty accessing health services than urban
Australians, leading them to have a lower life expectancy and worse outcomes on leading indicators
of health.
Death rates in regional, rural, and remote areas (referred to as ‘rural’ in this document unless
otherwise specified) are higher than in major cities, and the rates increase in line with degrees of
remoteness. People living in rural areas are more likely to defer access to general practitioners (GPs)
due to cost. Rural patients often have to travel significant distances for care, or endure a long wait
to see a GP close to where they live. They have higher rates of potentially preventable
hospitalisations, and are less likely to gain access to aged care.The closure and downgrading of
rural hospitals is seriously affecting the future delivery of health care in rural areas. For example,
more than 50 per cent of small rural maternity units have been closed in the past two decades in
Australia.1
Although Australia currently has an adequate supply of doctors nationally, there remains a significant
medical workforce shortage in rural areas.2 Many locally trained doctors are choosing not to work in
rural areas and nearly 76% of graduating domestic students reported living in capital cities in the
Medical Students Outcome Database Survey (MSOD).3 Research has shown that although GPs are
more likely to practice in rural locations than other specialisations, the growth in the specialist medical
workforce has outstripped the growth in GP numbers so that specialists now make up a larger
proportion of the overall medical workforce. The rural medical workforce is reliant on internationally
trained medical graduates.4
Table 1: Full-time equivalent medical practitioners per 100,000 population
Remoteness Area:

Medical Practitioners

Major city

437

Inner regional

292

Outer regional

272

Very remote

264

Table is replicated from Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2016. Australia’s health 2016. Australia’s health series no. 15. Cat. No. AUS
199. Canberra: AIHW.

Table 1 is a simple illustration of the current problem with workforce distribution. While it is possible
to provide a much more complicated analysis based on other measures, this table provides a useful
snapshot of the issue.
The debate is not just about numbers though, it is also about the right skill mix. Rural medical practice
requires individuals to possess a broad range of different skills – with primary care practitioners
representing the backbone of rural health care. The number of GP proceduralists, or generalists,
working across rural and remote Australia has been steadily declining. In 2002, almost a quarter of
Page 1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
the Australian rural and remote general practice workforce consisted of GP proceduralists. By 2014,
this figure had fallen to just under 10 per cent.5
Rural doctors work longer hours, particularly those in very remote areas.6 GPs in remote and very
remote areas spend shorter periods in their roles than those in regional areas. 7 To encourage
participation in the rural medical workforce, greater numbers of doctors will be needed in the future
to provide the same level of services. Rural doctors are also getting older. The mean average age
of rural GPs in Australia in 2014 was 50 years and 34 per cent were aged over 55.8 As these doctors
approach retirement the workforce shortage will become even more pronounced.
This position statement outlines the factors that influence medical practitioners to work in rural areas
and AMA proposed solutions that would relieve current pressures and entice more doctors to work
outside metropolitan areas.
2.

Addressing the mal-distribution of the workforce

There are a number of fundamental reasons why rural areas are not getting their fair share of the
medical workforce. These include:












inadequate remuneration;
work intensity including long hours and demanding rosters;
lifestyle factors;
professional isolation and lack of critical mass of similar doctors;
reduced access to professional development;
reduced access to locum support;
hospital closures and downgrading or withdrawal of other health services;
under-representation of students from a rural background;
poor employment opportunities for other family members, particularly partners;
limited educational opportunities for other family members; and
withdrawal of community services, such as banking, from such areas.

In 2016 the AMA conducted a Rural Health Issues Survey, which sought input from rural doctors
across Australia to identify key solutions to improving rural health care. The almost 600 doctors who
took part in the survey said extra funding and resources to support the recruitment and retention of
doctors and other health professionals was their top priority in trying to meet the health care needs
of their patients.
Doctors also said that for there to be genuine improvements in access to health care for rural
patients, there needed to be:







funding and resources to support improved staffing levels and workable rosters for rural
doctors;
access to high speed broadband;
investment in hospital facilities and equipment and practice infrastructure;
expanded opportunities for medical training and education in rural areas;
improved support for GP proceduralists; and
better access to locum relief.
Page 2

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
Successive Federal Governments have introduced a range of initiatives in a bid to attract and retain
doctors in rural areas. These include:







an expansion of medical training places;
improving the rural classification system for the allocation of workforce incentives with the
introduction of the Modified Monash Model;
reform of the GP Rural Incentives Program;
the establishment of Rural Clinical Schools;
introducing the Rural Junior Doctor Training Innovation Fund (RJDIF); and
other initiatives targeting doctors to work in communities with under-serviced health needs.

While some gains have been made,9 the geographical mal-distribution of doctors persists and the
sustainability of some rural health services remain under threat.
Evidence to date points to a number of elements that can positively affect the recruitment and
retention of doctors in rural areas:










3.

the early and continuing exposure of medical school students to rural medicine and
measures to encourage students from rural areas to enrol in medical schools are the most
likely of all initiatives to increase the workforce in these areas;
proper medical infrastructure, a strong training experience, and access to community and
professional resources, and continuing medical education are essential to the provision of a
rewarding professional and personal experience;
the opportunity to maintain and update skills is as important for rural specialists and GP
proceduralists as for their city counterparts.
consideration must be given to not only the needs of the medical practitioner, but also their
family - particularly with respect to access to employment opportunities, health and
education, and social amenities;
a critical mass of doctors within a region is important in improving the viability of a practice,
as well as enhancing professional development; and
appropriate remuneration and incentives.
AMA Proposed Solutions

Going forward, the AMA has identified five key priority areas for the Government to implement that
would help attract medical practitioners and students to rural areas. These are:
1. encourage students from rural areas to enroll in medical school and provide medical
students with opportunities for positive and continuing exposure to regional/rural medical
training;
2. provide a dedicated and quality training pathway with the right skill mix to ensure doctors
are adequately trained to work in rural areas;
3. provide a rewarding and sustainable work environment with adequate facilities, professional
support and education, personal comfort, and flexible work arrangements, including locum
relief;
4. provide family support that includes spousal opportunities/employment, educational
opportunities for children’s education, subsidy for housing/relocation and/or tax relief; and
Page 3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
5. provide financial incentives including rural loadings to ensure competitive remuneration.
These five key priority areas are addressed in detail below:
3.1.

Education and Training

Evidence suggests that students from rural backgrounds and/or those who train in a rural area (12
months) are more likely to practise in a rural area.10 Rural Clinical Schools, enrolment targets for
students with a rural background, and requirements for students to spend extended periods in rural
clinical settings are effective policy measures that should be built on.
The AMA has developed a number of policy proposals regarding education and training that have
the potential to improve the sustainability and distribution of the medical workforce. These include:











lifting the targeted intake of medical students from a rural background from 25 per cent of all
new enrolments to one-third of all new enrolments;
lifting the proportion of medical students required to undertake at least one year of clinical
training in a rural area from 25 per cent to one-third;
moving beyond the more limited RJDTIF and establishing a Community Residency Program
to provide doctors in training with prevocational general practice placements in rural areas.
These placements would support efforts to deliver more training and care in the community,
supplement the traditional hospital-based approach to medical training, and promote
‘generalist’ careers. They give doctors in training a valuable insight into life as a rural GP,
and encourage a long-term career in rural general practice;
expanding the Specialist Training Program to 1,400 places per annum (from 1,000 in 2018),
with a strong emphasis on rural placements;
establishing regional training networks (RTNs) to bolster rural training opportunities, and to
provide a valuable and meaningful career pathway for doctors in training who want to work
in rural Australia. It would also improve patient access to medical care. The AMA has
advocated for this policy and in April 2017, the Federal Government announced 26 regional
training hubs would be built into the Rural Health Multidisciplinary Training (RHMT) program
at existing RHMT program training sites. Many medical students have positive training
experiences in rural areas but prevocational and specialist medical training often requires a
return to metropolitan centres – this is progress towards more training in rural areas, with
city training required only for specific skills;
a culture shift needs to occur so that a rural term is considered favourably for doctors in
training and given prestige when applying for a specialty training program;
providing adequate accommodation and access to services, including the internet, for
doctors undertaking training in rural and remote locations;
rural specialists and GP proceduralists must have fully funded access to centres of
excellence to regularly enhance and broaden their skill base.

Further reading:
AMA Vision Statement for General Practice Training 2016
National Code of Practice - Flexible Work and Training Practices
Page 4

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
3.2

Rural Generalism

In rural and remote areas GPs are often required to provide a wider scope of practice than in
metropolitan areas. Although generalist numbers have been declining, a number of jurisdictions have
established strong rural generalist training pathways, particularly Queensland, which are helping to
boost the number of doctors with the range of skills needed to meet the health needs of country
Australians.
The AMA supports the expansion of the rural generalist model. The AMA formed part of the technical
working group organised by the Rural Doctors Association of Australia (RDAA) which developed a
policy document listing a set of agreed core principles that could be used as a basis for a national
rollout of an advanced training program for GPs. The principles agreed upon include:









Meeting the workforce and clinical needs of rural and remote Australia;
Early entry and ongoing support;
Curricula training and assessment;
Qualifications;
Management and organisational oversight;
Impact on established programs;
Availability of advanced training positions; and
Recognition.

For details of the principles:
Meeting the health needs of rural and remote Australia through an integrated strategic framework –
an Advanced Rural Training Program
Further reading:
AMA Position Statement - Fostering Generalism in the Medical Workforce 2012
Employment of generalist medical practitioners 2017
3.3.

Work Environment

Infrastructure and Facilities
The Commonwealth and State/Territory Governments must work together to ensure that rural
hospitals are adequately funded to meet the needs of their local communities. They need modern
facilities, and must be able to attract a sustainable health workforce. Our rural hospitals must provide
an environment that is conducive to delivering:






quality patient care;
a strong and relevant training experience for doctors in training;
support for the development and maintenance of procedural skills;
opportunities for professional development; and
safe working hours.
Page 5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
Further reading:
AMA Position Statement: Workplace Facilities and Accommodation for Hospital Doctors - 2006
AMA Position Statement: Safe work environments - 2015
The AMA believes that Council of Australian Government (COAG) discussions about the reform of
health care must consider a dedicated funding stream for rural hospitals, backed by a national
benchmark and performance framework, to ensure that State/Territory Governments maintain the
level of services that is promised to local communities.
The AMA recommends that the Government continue to fund rural GP infrastructure grants.
Previous rounds of infrastructure grant funding have delivered results for rural communities, 11 with
local practices taking realistic steps to improve patient access to services and support teaching
activities. The Australian National Audit Office reports that infrastructure funding grants are effective
and a good value-for-money investment. For more see the AMA Plan for better health care for
regional rural and remote Australia 2016.
The role of the internet and telehealth
The development of medical and communication technology has the potential to deliver significant
benefits to rural medicine. The health sector needs telecommunications connectivity for health
service delivery and management, including high resolution image transfer, doing business with
Government and complying with Government requirements, continuing professional development
and videoconferencing, online education, clinical decisions and other support. Doctors living in rural
locations rely on access to the internet for private use to maintain support networks, complete
personal administration and more.
To effectively leverage telecommunications technology to deliver better health outcomes at lower
cost in rural areas and to implement new models of health care, both mobile and broadband
technology must be ubiquitous, reliable, affordable, and supply adequate capacity.
However, the use of telehealth and telemedicine in rural Australia remains patchy and is not used to
full potential because of no, or inadequate, internet access. As mainstream healthcare provision
becomes increasingly technology based and requires more and faster broadband services to
operate, there is a real risk that rural areas will be left further and further behind in their ability to
provide quality health services.
The Government needs to ensure that high-speed broadband is available to the same standard and
at the same cost to all communities, businesses and services across the whole of Australia. Improved
Internet services will not eliminate the need for more doctors in rural areas and proper funding and
staffing for rural hospitals.
Further reading: AMA Position Statement - Better Access to High Speed Broadband for Rural and
Remote Health Care 2016
Page 6

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
3.4.

Support for Doctors

Personal circumstances
For doctors in rural locations, particularly those that have relocated, arrangements need to ensure
that they can access quality accommodation, understand the availability of local services and how
to access them, and there is support for their general wellbeing.
Isolation can also be a problem for rural doctors. The toll on an individual’s mental health can be
acute, not only for social networks but also for feeling connected professionally. When doctor’s
relocate to a rural location they can find it more difficult to maintain a robust and supportive network
of colleagues. There needs to be support from organisations, particularly Colleges where rural
doctors train, to ensure networks are built and maintained.
Community and Practice Support
The Commonwealth Government should continue to provide funding grants to allow local
governments in rural areas to purchase facilities to support medical practitioners such as
housing/practices/equipment, so that practitioners can operate a practice on a walk-in walk-out basis.
The costs of establishing a practice have been nominated as one of the major disincentives to
doctors who might otherwise relocate to an area of workforce shortage.
Further reading: AMA Position Statement - Easy Entry, Gracious Exit Model for Provision of Medical
Services in Small Rural and Remote Towns 2014
Indigenous Health Professionals
There is a strong link between the health of Indigenous people in rural communities and their access
to culturally appropriate health services. The AMA believes that:





greater effort should be made to encourage Indigenous people to undertake medical or
health professional training, and incentives provided to encourage Indigenous and nonIndigenous doctors and medical trainees to work in rural and remote Indigenous
communities;
Aboriginal Medical Services should be resourced to offer mentoring and training
opportunities in rural Indigenous communities to Indigenous and non-Indigenous medical
students and vocational trainees; and
training modules, resource material and ongoing advice should be developed for, and
delivered to, all medical schools and rural and remote medical practices on Indigenous
health issues, Indigenous-specific health initiatives and culturally appropriate service
delivery.

Locum Services
Locum services are a key element to addressing the problems of high workload for rural practice.
Lack of time off for professional development, family responsibilities and recreation can be among
the most negative aspects of life as a rural doctor. The Commonwealth Government should continue
to support local programs, including those coordinated by the rural workforce agencies and medical
Page 7

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
colleges, and where appropriate provide increased support based on the needs of particular
communities.
Family Support
The decision for a doctor to relocate or practise on a medium to long-term basis in rural areas also
has a significant impact on their family. Where a partner works or children are at school there may
be considerable direct or opportunity cost and loss of amenity from a decision to move to rural
practice. Simply paying a medical practitioner more, while helpful, does not address the full
dimensions of the problem and ignores significant factors in any individual's decision-making process
when considering rural practice.
There should be adequate compensation, support and access to re-training if required, so that a
partner or spouse can remain employed in an acceptable occupation if their partner moves to a
remote area. Job seeking assistance should also be offered if required. If the family requires
assistance to maintain a child in school in a larger town or city centre, there needs to be school fee
assistance, given the possible requirement for boarding and other increased services or tuition.
International Medical Graduates
The AMA recognises the substantial contribution that International Medical Graduates (IMGs) make
to the medical workforce and the delivery of health care in Australia, particularly in providing patients
with access to care in rural and remote communities. Australia has a strong reliance on IMGs, which
make up over 40 per cent of the medical workforce in rural and remote areas.12
It is in the interests of the profession and the public that appropriate, clearly defined and transparent
standards are in place to govern the assessment, recruitment and training of IMGs, and that every
effort should be made to support IMGs to enhance their long-term contribution to the medical
workforce. Though they do an excellent job, Australia cannot continue to rely on them indefinitely to
fill workforce gaps.
Further reading: AMA Position Statement - International Medical Graduates 2015
Nurses and multidisciplinary team care
Multidisciplinary team care involves professionals from a range of disciplines, such as dieticians,
physiotherapists and non-dispensing pharmacists in general practice, working as a GP led team to
deliver comprehensive care that addresses as many of the patient’s needs as possible. General
practice nurses and other members of a multidisciplinary health care team make a valuable
contribution to the delivery of primary health care services in rural areas.
The AMA believes funding arrangements must reflect and support the full range of work undertaken
by practice nurses for and on behalf of GPs in rural areas. Specific loadings for the cost of employing
practice nurses in rural areas should continue.
While the AMA does not support a role for independent nurse practitioners, this does not preclude
the capacity for highly skilled nurses, working as part of a collaborative primary care team led by one
Page 8

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
or more GPs to be supported in the delivery of services to remote areas where access to health care
is often very difficult. These nurses should:


3.5.

have appropriate clinical experience and training; and
be supported through the provision of appropriate communication technologies to ensure
that treatment can be properly co-ordinated with the supervising GP(s).
Financial Incentives

The AMA and the RDAA have developed a package of measures that recognises both the isolation
of rural and remote practice and the need for the right skill mix in these areas. Building a sustainable
future for rural practice: the rural rescue package, proposes two tiers of incentives:



a rural isolation payment available to all rural doctors including GPs, locums, other
specialists, salaried doctors and registrars, with the level of support provided increasing with
rurality; and
a rural procedural and emergency/on-call loading, aimed at boosting the number of doctors
in rural areas with essential advanced skills in a range of areas such as obstetrics, surgical,
anaesthetic, acute mental health, or emergency skills. Other areas of skills need may be
added as required, for example palliative care, paediatrics, or Indigenous health, to ensure
that community needs are met.

Further reading: Building a sustainable future for rural practice: the AMA/RDAA Rural Rescue
Package 2016
Funding for Outreach Programs
Outreach programs to provide funding assistance for specialists visiting rural and remote areas are
a valuable means to enhance the delivery of services in these areas. These programs should be
adequately funded and based upon the following principles:





services must be directed to communities where an unmet need is established by the local
medical practitioners;
services must be designed to fit in with local healthcare services, and wherever possible
they should include up-skilling and other measures to enhance the sustainability of local
medical services;
funding must be available to existing outreach services; and
there should be strong medical college involvement in outreach programs in order to
encourage greater participation and services should not be withdrawn without consultation
with local practitioners and the local community.

Hoang H, Le Q, and Kilpatrick S., ‘Small rural maternity units without caesarean delivery capabilities: is it safe and
sustainable in the eyes of health professionals in Tasmania?’, Rural and Remote Health, 12: 1941. (Online) 2012.
(http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/showarticlenew.asp?ArticleID=1941)
2 According to Australia’s Health 2016 (pg47), the number of full-time equivalent medical practitioners per 100,000 people
in 2014 in major cities was 437, compared to 292 in inner regional areas, 272 in outer regional areas, and 264 in both
remote and very remote areas.
1

Page 9

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 95 - Attachment 2

AMA POSITION STATEMENT
Medical Schools Outcomes Database National Data Report 2015, http://www.medicaldeans.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/Medical-Students-Workforce-Survey-Report-FINAL-14102015.pdf.
4 McGrail, Matthew R., and Russell, Deborah J., ‘Australia’s rural medical workforce: Supply from its medical schools
against career stage, gender and rural-origin’, Australian Journal of Rural Health, 5:1, November 2016.
5 Rural Health Workforce Australia National Minimum Data Set (MDS), Reports 2012, 2013 and 2014,
http://www.rhwa.org.au/fact-sheets--research---workforce-data.
6 Ibid. On average, regional, rural and remote GPs worked a total of 40.9 hours per week in 2014, compared with a mean
average of 37.6 hours per week for GPs in major cities. GPs working in very remote Australia work (on average) an
extra 9.1 hours per week compared with those working in major cities.
7 Ibid.
8 Rural Health Workforce Australia Fact Sheet, GP Workforce Trends, January 2016,
http://www.rhwa.org.au/client_images/1770753.pdf.
9 There were 9,158 GPs recorded as working in rural and remote Australian in 2016, a 5.8% increase compared to the
previous reporting period. For more see Rural Health Workforce Australia (2017), ‘Medical practice in rural and
remote Australia: Combined Rural Workforce Agencies National Minimum Data Set report as at 30 November 2016’,
Melbourne: RHWA, https://www.rwav.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2016-National-MDS-Report-30-November2016.pdf
10 McGrail, Matthew R., Russell, Deborah J., and Campbell, David G., ‘Vocational training of general practitioners in rural
locations is critical for the Australian rural medical workforce’, The Medical Journal of Australia, 205 (5), 216-222,
https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2016/205/5/vocational-training-general-practitioners-rural-locations-critical-australian.
11 ANAO Audit Report No.44 2011-12, ‘Administration of the Primary Care Infrastructure Grants Program’,
Commonwealth of Australia 2012,
https://www.anao.gov.au/sites/g/files/net3416/f/201112%20Audit%20Report%20No%2044.pdf
12 AMA International Medical Graduates 2015 Position Statement.
3

Page 10

