Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

File No: SFO0135
BW-:eg

Your Ref: 4341347

14 May 2018

Mr Mark Fitt

Committee Secretary

Senate Economics References Committee
PO Box 6100

Parliament House

CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear Mr Fitt,

‘City of Launceston response to the inquiry into the Indicators of, and impact
of, regional inequality in Australia

Firstly, on behalf of the City of Launceston, | would like to comment on how pleased |
am that an inquiry of this nature, and with such a broad scope, is being undertaken.
As a country that comprises considerable regional and remote areas, a national
conversation about the inequalities associated with this is critical. Therefore, | am
pleased to present this letter as our submission to this inquiry. We look forward to
participating in ongoing discussions as appropriate.

The submission has been structured round the Terms of Reference as follows;
Section 1 specifically addresses:
a) fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
b) improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government policies; and
c) regional development policies

Section 2 specifically addresses:
e) education

Section 3 specifically addresses:
l) any other related matters (specifically, homelessness and housing stress)

The Committee should note that this submission is not seeking to provide data that
supports the existence of regional inequality. We have taken the view that inequality
as a result of geographical location is already acknowledged. The submission will
instead focus on providing the Committee with a series of practical recommendations
based on available qualitative information.

Cit of Town Hall, St John Street, Launceston
- PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T 036323 3000
Noe LAUNC EST ON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

Launceston Context

Launceston is Australia’s third oldest city, with a proud history dating back to 1806.
Now home to more than 80,000 residents, Launceston is a major commercial hub
and the gateway to regional northern Tasmania. The city’s historic architecture and
natural beauty are attracting increasing numbers of tourists. Launceston is also at
the centre of a thriving and diversified agricultural sector and region that produces
world leading wine and timber products.

The city is recognised as family-friendly, with a relatively low crime rate, uncrowded
schools and lower-than-average cost of housing. It is well connected to national and
international markets through the expanding airport, access to a deep-water port at
Bell Bay and through the National Broadband Network (NBN) services across the
city.

There is a strong culture of innovation. Launceston has one of the highest rates of
start-ups per capita in the country and delivers high quality research through the
internationally renowned Australian Maritime College and the University of
Tasmania's highly regarded school of architecture and design.

Launceston also faces some challenges. It has a relatively high rate of
unemployment (particularly among young people), a relatively low rate of educational
attainment and slow rates of economic and population growth.

In comparison to Hobart, there is a significant lack of State and Federal Government
public sector jobs. Jobs in these sectors underpin significant long term and
professional job security. In addition to the impact on employment, Government
agencies also support the Hobart economy with their operating expenditures.

Launceston also has specific suburbs with significant socioeconomic and community
disadvantage. Launceston has relatively more social disadvantage than either
Tasmania as a whole or regional Tasmania as measured by SEIFA. It has 25% of
SA1s in the lowest 10% of Australian SA1s for economic resources. This index
focusses on the financial aspects of economic disadvantage and is a summary of
indicators related to income and wealth, excluding education and occupation related
variables. The level of disadvantage is widely recognised but it is not widely
understood or acknowledged as an economic development issue.

The suburbs of disadvantage are spatially concentration and clustered in Launceston
and this acts as a multiplier making enduring patterns of intergenerational
disadvantage the norm rather than the exception. Social mobility is also impacted
negatively by spatial clustering making it more difficult to get out of. It leads to entire
disadvantaged communities that feature low education, lack or access to services,
poor public transport and poor job opportunities and these trends are
intergenerational and embedded.

The concentration of disadvantage is very difficult to address because trying to
address the needs of a whole community is much more complex than the needs of

City of Town Hail, St John Street, Launceston
PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T 03 6323 3000
Aer LAUNC ESTON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

the individual within it. This is further exacerbated by the lack of strategy to address
disadvantage.

Section 1 (Policy)
The Launceston City Deal

As one of only three locations within Australia to have a City Deal, Launceston is well
positioned to provide insights and learnings (both now and into the future) about the
advantages and opportunities for improvements that are presented through the co-
ordination of federal, state and local government policies.

The Launceston City Deal was signed by Commonwealth, State and Local
Government in April 2017. The City Deal provides the region with a unique
opportunity fo ensure that all three levels of government, as well as local service
providers and regional partners, are involved in addressing the specific challenges
faced by the region. The City Deal vision is that by 2022 Launceston will be one of
Australia’s most liveable and innovative regional cities with growing incomes and
falling levels of disadvantage.

Advantages of the City Deal (as relevant to the inquiry)

A significant advantage of the City Deal is that it has enabled a tailored, place- based
and coordinated approach that supports a strong economic future, and has resulted
in actions that build on local assets, strengths and advantages. The collaborative
five-year plan will maximise Launceston’s potential through targeted investment to
deliver economic, social and environmental improvements, through:

e jobs and skills growth;
business, industry and population growth;
a vibrant, liveable city;
innovation and industry engagement; and
a healthy Tamar Estuary.

These areas (and all actions included within) were selected on the available
qualitative and quantitative evidence, an alignment of Federal, State and Local
Government visions for the region, and the strategic intentions of key regional
partners. This approach takes into account that every region has very different
opportunities, and faces different challenges and inequality. The alternative, which is
a top down, centralized approach, fails to consider the many nuances and
contributing factors of the region, and is less likely to result in successful outcomes.
The power of having a shared vision amongst all regional stakeholders (including all
levels of government) should not be underestimated. The shared vision, formalized
in the City Deal, has provided a mechanism, or lever, for collaboration amongst ail
partners to deliver on a shared commitment.

A second significant advantage that has arisen from the City Deal is that shared
accountabilities can shift the direction of policy change and action from a top-down to
a grass-roots approach. As an example, a City Deal commitment from the City of
Launceston is to develop and implement a Northern Suburbs Revitalization Plan
(NSRP). This will result in a series of commitments from ail levels of government, as

Cit of Town Hall, St John Street, Launceston

y
ae PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T 036323 3000
ja LAU NC ESTON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www. launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

well as regional partners, to address the systemic intergenerational and entrenched
disadvantage within suburbs in the City identified with low SEIFA rankings.

This provides an opportunity for a local government led initiative, with targeted
communities that seeks to understand local nuances, and use this understanding to
influence government policy and investment. This provides an invaluable opportunity
for community led policy change. A draft NSRP is expected in late 2018, and the City
of Launceston would welcome the opportunity to provide the Committee with further
updates on the progress of this initiative.

Recommendations associated with the City Deal

 

Recommendation 1. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics consider
the place-based approach of a City Deal as a key mechanism for improving co-
ordination of federal, state and local governments, and pursue the model within other
regional areas identified as experiencing significant regional inequality.

 

 

Recommendation 2. That any final recommendations from the Inquiry into
Regional Inequality in Australia acknowledge the role that local government
should play in informing state and federal policy changes, and that their
recommendations include mechanisms to effectively enable this.

 

 

 

 

Recommendation 3. That any final recommendations from the Inquiry into
Regional Inequality in Australia acknowledge the positive impact of public sector
jobs on a regional economy and support the relocation of Government agencies to
regional areas where net benefits can be demonstrated.

 

 

 

Additional observations on short term programs and projects to address
intergenerational and entrenched disadvantage

A further observation, particularly in relation to direct service delivery, is that
community services do not seem to be coordinated or collaborated in an effective
way. The result is that gaps, or needs, may be over or under targeted. in particular,
frustration has been expressed by service providers that it can be difficult to identify
which services are available within communities - i.e. there is no 'one source of
truth’. Often, there may be multiple service providers offering similar programs
targeted at the same people. These program/project providers may not be
collaborating or even aware of each other. Conversations within the community tell
us that this can lead to dis-engagement for individuals and communities. However,
further research would be required to validate the extent of this.

Cib of Town Hail, St John Street, Launceston
PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T03 6323 3000

y
a
ie LAUNCESTON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

It is also worth noting that the impact of short term funding cycles on program and
project delivery. Short term funding cycles (one to three years) provide limited
opportunities to address complex generational and entrenched social and economic
challenges and can lead to community frustration and generate a lack of trust and
confidence in the agencies involved in the initiatives. This in turn can create barriers
to future initiatives in these communities. The challenges associated with providing
long term funding security are complex, however, the negative effects of short term
program / project funding within areas affected by significant regional inequality,
cannot continue to be ignored.

Recommendations based on observations on short term programs and
projects to address intergenerational and entrenched disadvantage

 

Recommendation 4. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics
considers ways to improve the day to day coordination and collaboration of direct
service delivery within specific regions. For example, a State Government appointed
agency is nominated as a conduit, or overseer, of federal, state and local
government activities within a specific geographical region.

 

 

 

 

Recommendation 5. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics
considers longer term sustainable funding agreements with community and
government agencies to address the systemic community challenges contributing
to regional inequality.

 

 

—

Recommendation 6. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics
considers how to develop a commitment and a frame work to implement a long
term strategies to address disadvantage that transcends political and funding
cycles and can be embraced by the community, multiple agencies and the three
tiers of governments.

 

 

 

Section 2 (Education)

There is available data that shows the population of Launceston has a relatively low
rate of educational attainment. In the suburbs of Launceston where there is
significant SEIFA disadvantage most people have an educational attainment of year
10 or below. This means that between 56-69% of people in these suburbs have
levels of attainment below year 10. The value of education is often perceived to be
low in disadvantaged communities.

Regional Tasmanian also has a different educational school structure to that found in
mainland Australia. The primary point of structural difference is that education at
most regional secondary schools finishes at year 10. Of the ten secondary schools

City of Town Hail, St John Street, Launceston
oe” PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T03 6323 3000
er LAUNCEST ON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

within a 30km radius of Launceston, only three provide schooling up to Year 12. In
these schools, students who wish to pursue their education are required to move to
different educational institution that provides for year 11 and 12 education. This is
one of the many barriers that prevent local students from completing Year 12
schooling. This in turn contributes to the low rates of educational attainment.

In addition to other factors, the combination of poor educational attainment by

parents and the unusual structure of education in Tasmanian secondary colleges,
have adverse impacts on the educational attainment in disadvantaged communities.

Recommendations relating to education

 

Recommendation 7. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics
considers how to support for all secondary schools to offer educational programs
through until year 12.

 

 

Section 3 (Housing stress)

Tasmania as a whole is facing a deepening shortage of affordable and social
housing. This has implications for the people and families affected by insecure
housing and homelessness, and for the Tasmanian community as a whole. Some
suburbs in the City of Launceston face challenges, with the risk that inequality will
worsen and become further entrenched.

One quarter of the 3,749 households in five suburbs in Launceston where the SEIFA
is below 800, are renting in social housing. In some of the most disadvantaged SA‘
areas, up to 56% of households are renting social housing.

Of the five suburbs where SEFIA index is below 800, average median weekly
household income is $623 [median range $547 to $893]. Twenty five percent of
these households are suffering housing stress. Thirty eight percent of these
households are in rental stress.

The residential market in Launceston has been broadly flat over the past decade.
However, in the past 12 months it has begun to lift significantly. The increase in
property prices tends to be lower in suburbs which experience disadvantage. But
prices are going up. As an example the mean residential property price in Invermay
over the past 5 years has been around $220,000. Two months ago the average
price of 32 properties sold was $275,000 and in the last month over 39 sales have
been settled at an average of $288,000; so over the past year there has been an
increase of around 30% in the price of residential properties in Invermay.

Invermay is also a suburb where some SAls have a SEIFA below 800. Due to
market demand, there will likely be a significant impact on rental market and most
probably an uplift in rent charged.

Cit of Town Hall, St John Street, Launceston

vo PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T 03 6323 3000
Le LAUNCESTON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 97

These changes to property values are most probably related to the City deal and
from investors seeking higher returns on residential investment than are available on
the mainland and other pressures on housing across the State.

There is currently an increasing requirement for affordable housing in Launceston
and this need is anticipated to grow within the near future. The issue is that the rental
return required to justify the construction cost of new housing puts it out of the reach
of the disadvantaged sector in our community. In the absence of an incentive to
construct affordable accommodation, the returns are not compelling for investors. At
present, there does not appear to be an incentive for the private market to invest.

Recommendations relating to housing stress

 

Recommendation 8. That the Senate Standing Committee on Economics
considers how to encourage investment in affordable housing for disadvantaged
regional communities which could include infrastructure funding to local
government to support private development of affordable housing — this could
include a capital fund to drive affordable housing and incentives for institutional
investment in affordable rental housing.

 

 

 

Summary

The City of Launceston is currently looking to a buoyant future with many positive
opportunities growing from the City deal and other initiatives. Yet it also faces a
situation where intergenerational disadvantage has become embedded in a number
of suburbs over periods in excess of 30 years.

{t is unreasonable to expect a short term strategy or plan to effectively address this.
There is a need to develop a commitment that transcends political and funding
cycles which commits to:

e develop a long term strategy to address disadvantage; and

e develop a frame work for implementation; and

e coordinate services into disadvantaged communities; and

e see disadvantaged communities be seen through the lens of economic

development rather than as ‘problems’ to be ‘solved’.

| would like to reiterate that the City of Launceston is delighted that the Federal
Government is taking an interest in the indicators and impact of regional inequality in
Australia, and we appreciate the opportunity to respond to this inquiry and to
participate actively in ongoing conversations.

  

Cit of Town Hall, St John Street, Launceston

y
- PO Box 396, LAUNCESTON TAS 7250 T 03 6323 3000
Le LAUNCESTON E contactus@launceston.tas.gov.au www.launceston.tas.gov.au
