Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

Regional Development Australia NT
submission to the

Senate Inquiry into Regional Inequality
Please find herein RDA NT’s submission to the Standing Economics References Committee
Inquiry into: Indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia.
We thank you for the opportunity to provide comment for the inquiry.
Rather than addressing the Terms of Reference in their entirety our submission focusses on
select issues relating to regional inequality, and particularly those issues that are most
relevant in the context of the Developing the North agenda.
We feel that there is already a robust evidence base for regional inequality in Australia.
Should you require any additional details about our submission please contact Robin
Gregory at
or on

FISCAL POLICIES AT FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVELS
We would like to draw the Committee’s attention to the current Zone Tax Offset, also
known as the Zone Rebate, which “recognises the isolation, uncongenial climate and high
cost of living associated with living in identified locations” 1. These locations tend to be in
remote and very remote areas of Australia, including much of Northern Australia.
The fixed amounts are as follows: Zone A ($338), Zone B ($57) and Special Zone areas
($1,173) plus a percentage of dependants offset. The fixed amounts have not changed since
19932. The manifestly inadequate nature (particularly for single households) and declining
value of this offset was identified in the Pivot North report3 which recommended that the
“Australian Government investigate the equity of the current application of the Zone Tax
Offset arrangements so that:
• the zones reflect the current distribution of population and rebates are increased to
reflect the current cost of living in regional and remote areas; and
• the Zone Tax Offset applies only to persons whose principle place of residence is
within a zone”4.

1

ATO Website: https://www.ato.gov.au/General/New-legislation/In-detail/Direct-taxes/Income-tax-for-individuals/ZoneTax-Offset---exclude--fly-in-fly-out-/
2 Parliament of Australia. Research Note 26. History of the Zone Rebate. Available at
http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22library%2Fprspub%2FA9R36%22;src1=sm
1
3 Parliament of Australia. 2014. Pivot North: Inquiry into the Development of Northern Australia: Final Report. pp.144-146.
4 Parliament of Australia. 2014. Pivot North: Inquiry into the Development of Northern Australia: Final Report. pp.191.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

To date only the latter part of this recommendation appears to have been implemented.
This recommendation was made “not only out of fairness to residents of these
communities” but also as a mechanism to encourage people to move to Northern Australia 5.
Whilst we do not expect extraordinary tax breaks to encourage people to move to remote
areas we do believe that, in the interests of fairness, some recognition for existing residents
in these areas is appropriate to assist with the disadvantages explicitly recognised by the
ATO for these locations.
We urge the Committee to recommend that the Zone Tax Offset be reviewed and adjusted
to reflect the current cost of living in these areas and long period of time (25 years) since
the last increase in these fixed amounts.

IMPROVED CO-ORDINATION OF FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT POLICIES
RDA NT regularly experiences lack of co-ordination between the different tiers of
government, not solely in relation to policies but also in relation to programs.
Part of RDA NT’s role is to increase this connectivity. This is a difficult task, our small staffing
resources, and a very large jurisdiction, make it impossible to provide ongoing support
across multiple sectors, however there is merit in an external party such as the RDA network
being able to observe and facilitate opportunities for collaboration across tiers, and a
genuine need for it. We often find co-ordination within a single tier of government to be
challenging – indeed it is common for us the find barriers resulting from an inconsistent
approach between two programs administered by a single agency. RDA NT is currently
tackling a specific occurrence of just this issue and we anticipate, based on past experience,
that it will take many months of sustained effort to resolve.
Lack of co-ordination, both within and between different levels of government, often results
in unintended (perverse) outcomes and further disadvantages particularly the most
disadvantaged regions as they have the least capacity to influence change. We urge the
Committee to recommend better resourcing to oversee collaboration and co-ordination
between tiers of Government, and across all government programs.

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES
It is relevant to note here the observations by the House of Representatives in their Inquiry
into Regional Development and Decentralisation, specifically that:
“research indicates that no consensus exists on how regions can or should be developed, or
on how this ‘development’ can or should be measured. Indeed, there exists no consensus
on how ‘region’/’regional’ is defined for development purposes. There is also no consensus
on the relationship between ‘regional cities,’ ‘regional areas,’ ‘rural areas,’ and ‘remote

5

Parliament of Australia. 2014. Pivot North: Inquiry into the Development of Northern Australia: Final Report. pp.191-192.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

areas’, or whether all of these can, or should, be subsumed under the term of ‘regional
development’”6.
We suggest that one strategy which would go some way towards overcoming these
definitional issues is the consistent use, across all government agencies, of the remoteness
categories developed by the ABS. These categories (metropolitan, inner regional, outer
regional, remote and very remote) should replace general terminology, which is ill-defined
geographically and which suggest a degree of homogeneity which does not exist.
While the Regions 2030 agenda outlines initiatives the Australian Government is investing in
to demonstrate its commitment to regional Australia across five key focus areas (Jobs and
Economic Development; Infrastructure; Health; Education; and Communications), many of
these initiatives are part of national programs, and are not tailored to specific regional
needs. While the Regions 2030 agenda acknowledges that” a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach to
regional policy development doesn’t work” and that the agenda aims to “invest in
partnership with communities”, RDA NT sees little of this investment in practice. We
consider there is a lack of comprehensive strategy or policy at the Federal level on how to
address inequality in the regions despite there being much research into the depth of
regional inequality and suggestions of mechanisms to relieve the gap.
There is clear opportunity for a more nuanced approach to regional development. For
example, regional development policies for inner regional areas should likely be different to
those for remote areas. The RDA program has witnessed first-hand the potential for, and
negative impact of, shifting interpretations of what constitutes “regional Australia”.
We urge the Committee to recommend the adoption of the ABS remoteness index as the
default unit of analysis, and for all government agencies to be more responsive to and
consistent about how policy and programs relate to variations in remoteness and associated
disadvantage.

INFRASTRUCTURE
Whilst there is much that could be said (and has been) regarding regional inequality in terms
of infrastructure and the associated services provided to people in remote and very remote
areas, we would like to provide the Committee with a specific example:
Doppler weather radar for the Barkly region
The Barkly region is home to 7,530 people (of which 68% are Indigenous), covers an area of
303,295 square kilometers (about the size of Victoria), and produced $0.48B of the NT’s GSP
in the year ending June 2016 (largely through construction, mining, agriculture, and public
administration and services).

6

Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia. 2017. Issues Paper. House of Representatives Select Committee on
Regional Development and Decentralisation. Pp.1 Available at
http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/reportrep/024094/toc_pdf/IssuesPaper.pdf;fileType=applicatio
n%2Fpdf

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

The Doppler radar service in Tennant Creek ceased in late 2015. The aging infrastructure
was decommissioned, but rather than replace the old radar with a new radar it was decided
that the Himwari-8 satellite service should be adequate to meet the needs of Tennant Creek
and the surrounding Barkly region.
There are key differences between the two services regarding their capacity to show realtime, detailed rainfall data. In the Barkly rainfall data relates directly to business planning
and public safety, particularly in relation to road conditions and the risk of flash flooding.
Rainfall can be highly variable from one location to the next.
Additionally, the Himwari-8 service is most suitable for people with a fast internet
connection and high data allowance. Across the majority of the Barkly internet is only
available through nbn’s Skymuster satellite service which is expensive and subject to data
caps. Once people have reached their data allowance activities requiring high speed
downloads and/or a large data allowance, such as accessing the Himwari-8 service, are
simply not possible.
Anecdotally, negative impacts or incidents have included the inability to medivac patients,
residents and visitors becoming isolated on flooded roads, bogged cattle trucks (one of
which resulted in a $1M loss in export sales), vehicle rollovers, and significant delays in
service provision to remote Indigenous communities.
This is an example of the compounding nature of regional inequality. In low population
areas services are not only substandard and expensive, in many cases they are being eroded
over time. The loss of the weather radar in the Barkly followed the loss of shortwave radio
services, another example of local voices not being heard nor the impact of decisions fully
appreciated. Each service cannot be considered in isolation, as is always the case with
inequality impacts are interrelated and complex, commercial and personal.
Other compromised services in remote parts of the NT
The digital divide, the discrepancy in terms of accessibility, reliability and affordability of
telecommunications across regional Australia compared to metropolitan areas, is well
recognised. Measuring Australia’s Digital Dividei found that “across the nation, digital
inclusion follows some clear economic and social contours. In general, Australians with low
levels of income, education, and employment are significantly less digitally included. There
is still a ‘digital divide’ between richer and poorer Australians”. The report also found that
Geography plays a critical role, with “substantial differences between rural and urban
areas”. In 2017 digital inclusion is 7.9 points higher in capital cities (58.6) than in country
areas (50.7)”. For the first time, access to Internet Services was included in the SIEFA (ABS)7
Index for Disadvantage. It is not surprising to note that 11 out of the 17 Local Government

7

2033.0.55.001 - Census of Population and Housing: Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA), Australia, 2016
Available at
www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/2033.0.55.001~2016~Main%20Features~IRSD~19

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

Areas in the NT rank below the national average for Disadvantage, with 10 in the bottom
10% and 9 in the bottom 2% percentiles.
The next Regional Telecommunications Independent Review is scheduled to commence
shortly (the final report is due February 2019) so we refer the Committee to that Review
and the many that have preceded it.
Regarding inequality in relation to air services in regional, rural and remote Australia, we
refer the Committee to the current Inquiry into this subject by the Rural and Regional Affairs
and Transport References Committee.
Similarly, there have been a number of recent inquiries relating to access to health services
and the Committee is referred to the following sources:
•
the current Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee in relation to
Accessibility and Quality of Mental Health Services in Rural and Remote Australia;
•
the Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee report dated 9 March 2018 into
the Availability and Accessibility of Diagnostic Imaging Equipment around Australia, which
highlighted regional inequality in terms of access to, and costs of, diagnostic imaging
services;
•
the Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee report dated 19 December
2017 into the Value and Affordability of Private Health Insurance and Out-of-Pocket Medical
Costs (see Chapter 2, pages 15-17) summarising the regional inequality in relation to access
to private health providers, as well as the higher costs (including transport and
accommodation) associated with accessing services.
Another specific example relates to the absence of any private hospitals in remote or very
remote Australia. Despite this, residents of these regions must pay the additional Medicare
levy (in effect, face a monetary penalty) if they don’t have private health insurance. In
recognition of the unequal availability of health services Government could consider a levy
exemption for those residing in remote or very remote regions.
These are just three examples of existing or imminent resources which should inform
consideration of the indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia. It would
be understandable if the residents of regional Australia felt that more energy was invested
in understanding regional inequality than addressing the problems.

BUILDING HUMAN CAPITAL
The Northern Territory is now eight years into a low population growth ‘era’ featuring a
deterioration in interstate migration. RDA NT holds the view that Population growth in
northern and remote areas of Australia will stimulate better services, a stronger retail
sector, provide more opportunity, more jobs, and more significant private investment. It is
also economically important, for governments of remote jurisdictions to sustain a consistent

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

share of the national fiscal pool of funds generated from the Goods and Services Tax. Recent
research by the Northern Institute “Synthesising Northern Territory Population Research: A
report to the Northern Territory Department of the Chief Minister”8 suggests priority
strategies for addressing population growth challenges in the Territory include attracting:
• International migrants, with a focus on countries which are providing increasing numbers
of migrants to the Territory in recent years;
• Territory ’alumni’ (past residents) who might return themselves (one third of people
leaving the Territory intend to return) and might be ambassadors for the Territory,
promoting it as a destination for friends and colleagues;
• Late career workers and those retiring from full time work, particularly those who arrived
in the late 1970s and early 1980s after Cyclone Tracy and Self-Administration; and
• Women in the early stages of their careers.
We urge the Committee to recommend that the Commonwealth Government should
support the Northern Territory Government to develop specific policies and strategies that
will induce government, business and community activities which will see these strategies
expressed on the ground.
ENHANCING LOCAL WORKFORCE SKILLS
The increased need for regional residents to travel to access professional development
opportunities is yet another cost for businesses and individuals.
As an example of the inequality experienced by regional residents the 2015 Stocktake and
Analysis of Commonwealth Funded Aged Care Workforce Activities report cites that only
3.7% of Commonwealth funded aged care workforce activities, and 7.9% of funding, were
specifically for regional, rural and remote service provision.

EMPLOYMENT ARRANGEMENTS
Refer to the Senate Finance and Public Administration References Committee report
Appropriateness and effectiveness of the objectives, design, implementation and evaluation
of the Community Development Program (CDP) dated 14 December 2017, as well as
submissions made to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, for examples of how
inequality and existing disadvantage can be exacerbated through poorly designed and
implemented policies and programs.

8

Taylor, A. and Carson, D. (2017). Synthesising Northern Territory Population Research: A report to the
Northern Territory Department of the Chief Minister. Charles Darwin University: Northern Institute Available
at http://www.cdu.edu.au/sites/default/files/the-northern-institute/rec-ier-report-print-version.pdf

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 98

DECENTRALISATION POLICIES
Refer to the Select Committee on Regional Development and Decentralisation inquiry and
interim report on best practice approaches to regional development, the decentralisation of
Commonwealth entities, and supporting corporate decentralisation.

ANY OTHER RELATED MATTERS
Inequality in regional Australia ultimately comes down to a system of government and
service delivery which prioritises investment based on population. The 2013 Living in the
Regions report looked at why people moved to/stayed in regional WA and lifestyle was the
main factor. This highlights the problem that people leave regional Australia because of a
lack of services, consequently the region receives less funding and services are further
reduced, so more people leave. If governments are serious about addressing regional
inequality, and about developing Northern Australia, they need to address this issue first.

i

Thomas, J, Barraket, J, Wilson, C, Ewing, S, MacDonald, T, Tucker, J & Rennie, E, 2017, Measuring Australia’s
Digital Divide: The Australian Digital Inclusion Index 2017, RMIT University, Melbourne, for Telstra. Available at
http://digitalinclusionindex.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Australian-Digital-Inclusion-Index-2017.pdf

