Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99

Office of the Vice-Chancellor

LA TROBE UNIVERSITY’S SUBMISSION TO
THE SENATE ECONOMIC REFERENCES
COMMITTEE
May 2018

The indicators and impact of
regional inequality in Australia

ENQUIRIES
Leon Morris
Chief of Staff
La Trobe University
Victoria 3086

latrobe.edu.au

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

INTRODUCTION
La Trobe University welcomes the opportunity to respond to this inquiry on the indicators and the impact of
regional inequality in Australia.
With four campuses outside of metropolitan Melbourne – in Bendigo, Albury-Wodonga, Shepparton and
Mildura – La Trobe is one of the leading higher education providers across regional Victoria. Over the years,
more than 35, 000 students have graduated from La Trobe’s regional campuses, the majority of which
continue working in regional areas, directly addressing skilled workforce shortages. Annually, 695 FTE jobs
in health, teaching and business are filled by La Trobe University regional graduates who contribute more
than $99 million to Victoria’s Annual Gross Regional Product (GRP) 1.
The fact that there is inequality among Australian regions is not contested. A 2018 report by the Office of
the Chief Economist 2 concluded that Australia’s 26 successive years of economic growth has not been
uniform across its regions. For instance, the annual growth of Melbourne’s central business district (CBD)
was four times higher than the growth rate of Hume in regional Victoria.
Where policy makers differ is in terms of what actions Governments should take to address regional
inequality. The same Chief Economist report argues that “in part, the future economic success of Australia
will depend on having cities that function well and can adjust to growing demands.” Similarly, the
contribution from Danielle Wood (Grattan Institute) recommends that Governments should not fight the
gravitational pull of cities and should focus on building and maintaining infrastructure where benefits
outweigh costs namely in cities.
La Trobe cautions against this view – the key to regional development and combatting regional inequality
for the nation’s benefit is to increase investment in regional Australia, including targeted investments to
improve participation and attainment in higher education. This view is corroborated by the conclusions of
the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Education (2018) 3 which calls on the
Government to put regional, rural and remote education and development at the centre of the economic
agenda for jobs and growth.
For this reason, La Trobe welcomes the announcements in the 2018-19 Commonwealth budget to support
regional Australians to transition to further education and training. These include crucial additional subbachelor, enabling and bachelor Commonwealth Supported Places (CSPs). While these numbers are
insufficient to impact on closing the participation and attainment gap, this is a step in the right direction
and we urge the Government to commit to a significantly higher longer-term commitment to allow
regionally based universities to invest with certainty. In addition, La Trobe welcomes the establishment of
the Murray Darling Medical School Network, of which La Trobe is an integral part, which will contribute to
addressing the medical workforce shortage in regional Australia.
For the purpose of this submission, La Trobe will focus on Terms of Reference (e) education, (f) building
human capital and (g) enhancing local workforce skills.

Cadence Economics (2017), ‘La Trobe University’s Regional Economic Contribution’
Office of the Chief Economist (2018), ‘Flexibility and Growth’
3 Halsey, J. (2018) Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote Education – Final Report, Department of Education
and Training: Canberra
La Trobe University
1
2

1

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
In line with the key recommendations of the Independent RRR Review, adopt a long-term
adequately-funded plan strategy that puts regional, rural and remote education and development
at the centre of the economic agenda for jobs and growth.
BUILDING ON EXISTING TAFE-UNIVERSITY PARTNERSHIPS IN REGIONAL AUSTRALIA, THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD ADOPT A 10-YEAR PLAN TO ACHIEVE HIGHER EDUCATION PARTICIPATION
AND ATTAINMENT PARITY BETWEEN AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL CITIES AND REST OF STATES BY 2028.

REGIONAL INEQUALITY IN AUSTRALIA – A CONTINUING NATIONAL CHALLENGE
According to the 2018 ‘Flexibility and Growth’ report released by the Office of the Chief Economist, although
Australia has experienced 26 successive years of economic growth, “the experience of Australia’s regions
however, has been far from uniform.”
68% of economic growth over the past 15 years has occurred in capital cities that are growing at 3.2% per
year. Meanwhile, the non-mining regions of Australia are growing well below the national average (2.5%).
As shown in Figure 1, GRP is largely driven by capital cities. The report predicts that as cities will continue
to grow, regions are likely to fall further behind as a share of the economy meaning that inequality
between regions and cities is likely to grow even further.
The reasons for the growing gap between capital city and regional growth include:


Difficulty to attract talent and skills (Remote and regional areas experienced a net loss of working age
residents over the past 10 years) with the flow of international migrations exacerbating these trends.



The shift to knowledge-intensive industries, which rely on human capital as the primary factor of
production, is driving the concentration of economic activity to capital cities.

Figure 1: Gross Regional Product (GRP) by capital city and regional area, 2015-16

2

La Trobe University

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Similarly, a 2018 CEDA report 4 notes that even though measures of income inequality in Australia have not
risen since the global financial crisis, there are areas such as education inequality and postcode inequality
where more progress should have been made.
The 2018 Independent RRR review, led by Professor Halsey, comes to a similar conclusion of significant
variation between regional Australia’s and capital cities’ employment projections. This, according to the
review, means that “access to high quality education and training opportunities for RRR young people and
communities are ‘non-negotiables’”. It calls on the Government to “...implement a long-term plan that puts
regional, rural and remote education and development at the centre of the economic agenda for jobs and
growth.” 5
The imperative for a long-term plan is clear. In recent years (2007-2015), employment growth in Australia
has been driven by those with university degrees. As argued in the 2016 ‘The Graduate Effect’ 6 report, the
average annual growth rate of employment for people of all ages employed with university degrees has
been 4.9 per cent whereas employment among those without university degrees grew by 0.23 per cent (see
Figure 2). In addition, employment for those in the 20-24 age bracket (new graduates entering the
workforce) shows a much higher annual growth rate (2.8 per cent) than for those without university
degrees.
Improving access to higher education while putting in place a national strategy to address the gap
between higher education participation and attainment should be a key national objective.
Figure 2: Average annual employment growth, by age and education attainment (2007-2015)

Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) (2018), ‘How unequal: Insights on Inequality’
Halsey, J. (2018) Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote Education – Final Report, Department of Education
and Training: Canberra, p.29, p.81
6 Cadence Economics (2016), ‘The Graduate Effect: Higher Education Spillovers to the Australian Workforce’
La Trobe University
4
5

3

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

ADDRESSING INEQUALITY STARTS WITH EDUCATION: THE GAP BETWEEN REGIONAL AND
METROPOLITAN HIGHER EDUCATION OUTCOMES
In the inner suburbs of Melbourne, 44% of Australian citizens have a Bachelor or higher level of education.
In the regional town of Shepparton, only 10% of Australian citizens are graduates7.
Similar patterns are prevalent in other Australian states. While the demand-driven system, in place until the
end of 2017, had improved access to higher education to previously under-represented cohorts, regional
and remote students continue to have significantly lower rates of participation than their metropolitan
counterparts.
Data from the 2016 Census for the school leaver cohort (see Figure 3) shows the discrepancy in
participation in higher education depending on students’ home post code. In communities such as
Canberra, access to higher education for school leavers is almost at 100% whereas in some regional areas
it is well below 20%.
Figure 3: Proportion of Australian citizens at the age of 19 enrolled at a University or other Tertiary Institution by place
of usual residence (SA2 ABS measure) - 5 years earlier as at ABS 2016 census

Source: Planning and Institutional Performance Unit (PIPU), La Trobe University

7

4

2016, ABS Census
La Trobe University

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

Disproportionate impact of funding cap on underserviced communities
Regrettably, the recent freeze in university funding announced in MYEFO 2017 has had a disproportionate
impact on those communities and regions that need it most. The freeze puts a hand brake on innovation
and growth in delivery for regional, rural and remote students and thus impedes economic growth and
development. La Trobe has already had to restructure some of its course offerings and resource
allocations on regional campuses in order to adjust to the new funding reality.
This will have an adverse mid to long-term impact on the development of skills in regional Australia, which
will subsequently negatively impact regional economic development, further exacerbating regional
inequality.
A step in the right direction
La Trobe continues to believe that the potential of the demand-driven system had not yet been fully
realised, particularly in regional Australia. La Trobe welcomes the announcements in the 2018-19
Commonwealth budget to support regional Australians to transition to further education and training.
These include crucial additional sub-bachelor, enabling and bachelor Commonwealth Supported Places
(CSPs). However, we note that the initial commitment is insufficient to close the participation and
attainment gap. Accordingly, La Trobe continues to call for a significantly higher and long-term
commitment to allow regionally based universities to invest and educate their students with certainty.
Additionally, La Trobe welcomes the establishment of the Murray Darling Medical School Network, of which
La Trobe is an integral part, which will contribute to addressing the medical workforce shortage in regional
Australia.

DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO TACKLING REGIONAL INEQUALITY
The fact that there is inequality among Australian regions is not contested. Where policy makers differ is in
terms of what actions Governments should take to address regional inequality. For instance, the abovementioned ‘Flexibility and Growth’ report argues that “in part, the future economic success of Australia will
depend on having cities that function well and can adjust to growing demands.” In a guest contribution to
the same report, Danielle Wood (Grattan Institute) argues that Governments should not “fight the
‘gravitational’ pull of the cities and major regional centres” and that past attempts at “intervention have
been expensive and did little to increase regional growth and productivity”. The Grattan Institute claims that
governments are better off focusing on building and maintaining infrastructure where benefits outweigh
costs and generally improving the quality of services in regional areas. This echoes the 2011 Grattan
Institute report ‘Investing in Regions: Making a Difference’ which claimed that many regional development
programs such as job-attraction schemes, regional universities, small roads and major infrastructure – did
not materially accelerate growth in slow-growing regions.” 8
La Trobe cautions against this view – the key to regional development and combatting regional inequality
for the nation’s benefit is to increase investment in regional Australia, including targeted investments to
improve participation and attainment in higher education. As noted above, this view is corroborated by the
conclusions of the Independent Review into Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Education (2018) which
calls on the Government to “implement a long-term plan that pits regional, rural and remote education and
development at the centre of the economic agenda for jobs and growth.”

8

Daley and Lancy (2011), The Grattan Institute, ‘Investing in regions: Making a difference’

La Trobe University

5

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 99
The indicators of, and impact of, regional inequality in Australia

In addition, regional universities play an important role in the social and economic contribution of the
communities in which they serve. La Trobe University regional graduates contribute more than $99 million
to Victoria’s Annual Gross Regional Product (GRP). Similarly, a report 9 commissioned by the Regional
Universities Network (RUN) concluded that RUN universities deliver an additional $1.7 billion to their
regional economies and that seven out of ten RUN graduates go on to work in a regional areas.

CONCLUSION
In this submission, La Trobe has focused largely on higher education inequality across Australia,
particularly the gap between regional and metropolitan attainment and participation. La Trobe is
committed to continuing to play an important role in providing the skills needed for economic development
in regional Victoria.
The announcements in the 2018-19 Commonwealth budget aimed at supporting regional Australians to
transition to further education are steps in the right direction. However, they are too small-scale to bring
about the step change required to achieve parity in higher education attainment across Australia.
Achieving this goal, will require a longer-term 10-year strategy with adequate funding and resources to put
in place the right policy settings. Existing dual TAFE-University partnerships in regional Australia could be
better maximised to achieve this goal.
Australia’s future success does not only depend on the capacity of its major cities to adapt to accelerated
population growth but also on the extent to which regional Australia is provided with the opportunities and
investment to become an integral part of Australia’s future economic growth.
By further investing in regional higher education, the Government will lay the foundations for a skilled
regional workforce that will underpin regional economic development and mitigate against increasing
regional inequalities.

9

6

Nous Group (2018), ‘The economic impact of the Regional Universities Network’
La Trobe University

