Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Senate Economics References
Committee
Inquiry into Regional Inequality in
Australia

Latrobe City Council Submission

December 2019

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

1. Introduction
Latrobe City welcomes the opportunity to provide its submission to the
Senate Economics References Committee’s Inquiry into Regional
Inequality in Australia.
While Latrobe City has provided a previous submission to this Inquiry
(Regional Inequality in Australia Submission 45) when submissions were
called during the 45th Parliament, we are pleased to present some
further evidence to this Inquiry in the context of its current Terms of
Reference.
It is well recognised that municipalities in regional Australia are
experiencing inequality in a number of areas compared with their
metropolitan counterparts. Latrobe City is pleased to have this
opportunity to provide its input into this discussion and address the ways
in which the disadvantage we are currently experiencing as a
transitioning community is further exacerbated by the aspects of inherent
inequality in the key areas covered by this Inquiry and its Terms of
Reference.
As you would know, Latrobe City is one of Victoria's major Regional
Cities, well known for excellence in engineering, education and health
care, and is recognised as a cultural centre for Gippsland.
Latrobe City has been a hub of Victoria’s power generation for decades
and even today produces most of Victoria’s electricity from its extensive
brown coal reserves. Furthermore, given its long history of electricity
generation, the region has an extensive electricity distribution
infrastructure that connects to the existing generation facilities in
Melbourne and broader Victoria. Latrobe City also hosts a highly skilled
workforce that has been associated with the power industry, other heavy
industries and the related supply chains.
Latrobe City is also a major industrial centre, and with a Gross Regional
Product (GRP) of approximately $4.87 billion (2017) makes a significant
contribution to the Victorian economy.

0

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Our region has been in economic transition for many years, following the
Hazelwood Power Station and Mine closures in 2017 and the
subsequent significant Government investment in the region. With the
anticipated future closures of AGL Loy Yang and Yallourn, our region
continues its significant economic and structural transition.
There is a need to ensure that this change does not further exacerbate
the many forms of disadvantage that Latrobe City is currently
experiencing, and the region is not disproportionally affected as the host
to power industry and the region directly impacted by related job losses.
At the core of Latrobe City’s transformation is a strong need to drive the
region’s employment and economic diversification, given that Latrobe
City has borne, and is expected to continue to bear, a significant
economic cost of the structural change currently occurring in Australia’s
energy sector.
The Latrobe City Council has engaged with its community through a
Strength-Led Transition Plan endorsed by Council in 2016 to deliver a
vision for transitioning into a strong, sustainable and prosperous future in
the aftermath of the closure of Hazelwood Power Station and Mine. This
Plan combines important matters for our community and builds on a
strong effort to engage the community and all levels of government as
partners in the Latrobe City’s transitioning from generations-long reliance
on coal powered electricity generation to a more diversified economy.
At the heart of this transformation is a program that builds on the
community’s known strengths, focuses on delivering liveability
commensurate with the ‘regional city’ status, and aims to increase
economic diversity and population, employment and skills growth.
Regional Cities like Latrobe City can offer high standards of living and
this liveability aspect can be and certainly - as is the case in Latrobe City
- has been supported by significant Government investment in sporting
facilities, and recreational and cultural infrastructure. We recognise that
while liveability is an important factor for people considering a move to
regional areas, ultimately what drives the regional growth is investment
in economic development and provision of employment, through support
to business (e.g. tax incentives, loans and equity investment) and the
creation of an enabling investment environment.
In the Latrobe City’s context, these support measures could serve as a
foundation for local competitive industries and related employment

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

growth, given that the closure of power stations has resulted and is
anticipated to result in the further loss of high salaried highly skilled jobs
in the energy sector being replaced by more menial jobs.
Therefore, we see a successful and well planned diversification of
Latrobe’s economy and transition, supported by innovation such as low
carbon energy technologies as critically important to Latrobe City’s
future.
In its previous submissions to Government, Latrobe City has urged the
Federal Government to:
1. Consider the impacts from anticipated power station closures on
the region through effective planning, engagement and support for
transition to reduce disproportionate adverse impacts on the
region;
2. Consult and collaborate with Latrobe City and its community
throughout all phases of the transition; and
3. Support low emission technologies and alternative uses of carbon
from brown coal such as hydrogen production as part of the
region’s economic diversification.
Council invites all levels of Government to partner with Latrobe City
Council and its community in all discussions, policy and program
planning and design with regards to all aspects of the region’s continued
transition and the solutions that could be created. A long-term,
considered plan for transition for the Latrobe Valley towards a future of
economic and social prosperity is achievable, and can be best driven
with involvement of the Latrobe City community.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Latrobe City’s Submission to the Inquiry
In this submission, Latrobe City addresses the Terms of Reference from
the perspective of economic transition and diversification currently
occurring in Latrobe City:
a. fiscal policies at federal, state and local government levels;
Government investment in economic development and employment
creation is of fundamental importance to supporting the regions.
This could take a form of tax incentives, loans and equity investment in
businesses that can demonstrate a solid business case in support of
their establishment and growth in Latrobe City.
b. improved co-ordination of federal, state and local government
policies;
Contraction of the coal and electricity industry in Latrobe City has had,
and is expected to have, a significant disruptive impact on the
productivity, economic and social outcomes across this community. This
requires a concerted effort by all levels of Government to be adequately
addressed.
The Government at all levels should collaborate to introduce a strategic
and staged plan for transitioning communities such as Latrobe City,
combined with a program of proactive and timely measures to ensure
that the investment in the region delivers value for money through
targeted and prioritised approaches, any interventions are appropriate
and that all relevant parties, including the Latrobe City community are
heard and engaged in this process.
c. regional development policies;
Council strongly believes that a coordinated effort and proper planning
by State and Federal Governments are required to attract investment in
regional areas through incentives and strategies to create enabling
investment environments.
This is to ensure that the economic costs of Victoria moving away from
coal-generated power are not disproportionally felt in this region which
still relies heavily upon coal-fired power generation.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

A staged transition plan for Latrobe City that is supported by a high level
of coordination between all levels of Government is required to attract
private and public investment, and improve connectivity, key services
and liveability of this region.
There is also a need for continuous support programs. This region has
had Latrobe Valley Industry and Infrastructure Fund (2012 - 2014) and a
similar grants program through Latrobe Valley Economic Facilitation
Fund (June 2017 - 2018). These programs should be closely aligned
with a structured plan for transition and related investment priorities.
Furthermore, the de-centralised Government services to support rural
and regional development, as has occurred through Regional
Development Victoria (RDV) in Gippsland are critical to address the
inequality in service and infrastructure delivery experienced in Australia’s
remote and regional areas.
d. Infrastructure;
The State and Federal Governments have made a notable contribution
to Latrobe City through a comprehensive package of infrastructure
investment to boost employment and to diversify our economy since the
Hazelwood closure, including the creation of the Latrobe Valley
Economic Zone and the Latrobe Valley Authority (LVA).
There have been further major infrastructure investments, including
Latrobe City Hospital Stage 3, coupled with funding support for major
projects such as Latrobe Creative Precinct, Gippsland High-Tech
Precinct and the Morwell Revitalisation Project, as well as recreational
infrastructure projects such as Gippsland Regional Aquatic Centre,
Traralgon Sports Stadium, Morwell Recreation Reserve Masterplan and
upgrades to Latrobe City Sports and Entertainment Stadium.
Despite these significant infrastructure developments, the financing of
the utility and service infrastructure in regional areas remains a
challenge due to a number of issues, including access to finance, user
pays funding models, misalignment of infrastructure planning and growth
opportunities along with regulatory constraints.
There remains a need for greater government intervention in support of
this enabling infrastructure to drive economic growth and address
regional disadvantage brought about to Latrobe City through the
structural changes in Australia’s energy market.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

In terms of transport infrastructure, the restricted rail connectivity and
under-investment in the Gippsland line are considered as notable
impediments to the region’s development. Compared with its Regional
City counterparts, Gippsland’s rail services require significant upgrades
to improve overall quality, frequency and reliability. Thus far, Gippsland
has not benefitted from major state investments such as the Regional
Rail Link, the North Eastern line rebuild, and upgrades to the Ballarat
and Bendigo lines.
Some solutions for the Gippsland line have recently been presented
through the Stronger Together report, commissioned by the City of
Geelong, which puts forward a case for a 200km/hour fully electrified
community rail program between Melbourne and Latrobe (Traralgon).
Similarly, Rail Futures Incorporated (RFI) has developed a 30-year
blueprint for rail development in Melbourne called Melbourne Rail Plan
2020-2050 that includes a South-East Fastline (SEFL) as a solution for
the Gippsland line.
These programs, however, are estimated to require significant net
investment over a timeframe of 17+ years.
The Federal Government has committed to funding a faster rail business
case for the Melbourne to Traralgon rail corridor. This could include
investigations into an interim solution to support investment in shorterterm delivery of improvements in service reliability and journey time
reductions on the Gippsland line. Some options could include the
completion of Caulfield-Dandenong quadruplication, other metropolitan
area works and further Gippsland line infrastructure improvements.
e. Education;
f. Building human capital;
g. Enhancing local workforce skills;
These three aspects i.e. education, building human capital and
enhancing local workforce skills are closely linked in the Latrobe City
context.
While the region is experiencing high unemployment, some industries in
the Latrobe Valley such as meat processing are currently suffering from
acute workforce shortages.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Furthermore, a recent study by the National Institute of Economics and
Industry Research (NIEIR) found that Gippsland’s economy lacks
‘entrepreneurial environment’ and suffers from low numbers of
‘knowledge creation workers’ who drive entrepreneurship and
innovation.
In accordance with the recent economic modelling, the Churchill
Campus contributes more than $32 million in real GDP to the region, and
nearly 70 per cent of Federation University’s students stay in the region
after they graduate, enhancing the knowledge capital, employment pool
and economic growth.
It is also well documented that regional universities and other regional
tertiary education providers can play a key role and further enhance
successful transition and economic growth initiatives in the regional
economies.
Government’s support for the Federation University Churchill Campus to
retain and grow their student numbers (including international students)
and match skills with the demand will be imperative to a successful
economic transition, and the growth of competitive industries and high
demand sectors such as community and health services, and
construction. This could be done through targeted scholarships to attract
students to regional parts of Australia.
The Government could introduce further measures to drive place-based
approach to regional higher education so that campuses and courses
can be expanded to suit the local industry and employment needs, and
support innovation.
h. employment arrangements;
Given the transitioning of its economic base, it is important to ensure that
Latrobe City’s workforce continues to have the skills that match
immediate and future industry needs to support employment in the
region.
After the Hazelwood closure, Latrobe Valley Authority (LVA) was
established by the Victorian Government to provide for the Worker
Transition Service that connects workers and their families to skills
development, training, information and personal support. This will enable
them to take up new employment opportunities, start their own business
or move into retirement.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Government support is required to ensure that the regional skills
development and needs are aligned and pathways from training to
employment continue to be well defined and supported by longer-term
planning. The ability for the regional university campuses and tertiary
education providers to retain and grow their student numbers and match
skills with the demand will be of critical importance to a successful
economic transition.
i. decentralisation policies;
The decentralisation of government functions serves as a platform of
growth and employment generation in transitioning regional economies.
Advancing digital technologies and connectivity positions government
agencies to garner the benefits that come from regionally based
workforces.
The State Government has already made a commitment to a new
GovHub for the Latrobe Valley. It is expected to house up to 300 staff.
The next phase of our campaign is to secure a commitment from the
Federal Government to support the growth of the Latrobe Valley
GovHub to equal that of its Bendigo and Ballarat counterparts which
host approximately 1000 staff.
Federal Government agencies should assess the possibility of relocation
of government functions to regional areas whenever possible, and
particularly when new government agencies are established or restructured. As part of this process, the Federal Government is invited to
support decentralisation of government agencies to Latrobe City and the
Latrobe Valley GovHub.
j. innovation;
Latrobe City’s success in transitioning will require support to capitalise
on innovative opportunities that build on the region’s strengths and our
position as a Regional City.
Latrobe Valley brown coal represents a significant resource which could
potentially be utilised for production of a wide range of value-added
products utilising various technologies. Latrobe City Council believe that
carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) could provide significant brown
coal-fired power generation and product manufacturing opportunities.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

There could be a range of beneficial impacts on the Latrobe City’s
economy and beyond if carbon-based projects were developed and
implemented through the utilisation of these new technologies, including
new investment opportunities for our local economy. This could be
supported by Government investment in research and development of
low emission technologies and alternative uses of carbon from brown
coal.
Government support is required for the establishment of a Regional
Carbon Innovation Centre (RCIC) in the Latrobe Valley as a hub for
innovation, research and development from an early technological stage
to a demonstration and pre-commercialisation stage in line with the
feasibility study that has been recently commissioned by Australian
Carbon Innovation (ACI).
Initiatives such the Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) could
provide further economic development opportunities through safe
production and transport of clean hydrogen from the Latrobe Valley to
Japan.
Given its close proximity to established ports, Council believes that
Latrobe Valley is best placed to be established as a national hydrogen
hub building on its vast deposits of brown coal, extensive infrastructure
that connects to the existing power generation facilities in Melbourne
and the broader Victoria, industrial capacity and engineering skills,
available carbon capture and storage (CCS) sites, and natural resources
such as water, wind and gas.
The CarbonNet project is an example of an investigation into the
potential for establishing a commercial-scale carbon capture and storage
(CCS) network in the Latrobe Valley. New technologies such as CCS
could have a significant impact on the future of coal-fired power
generation and should be considered during policy development.
However, as is the case with other clean energy technologies, the cost
of CCS needs to be brought down through innovation, research and
deployment. This will require a high level of national and international
research collaboration, and sustained government and public support.
Council also notes that other innovative technologies such as waste to
energy that is proposed for Australian Paper’s (AP) thermal waste to
energy plant in Latrobe Valley are imperative to Latrobe City’s
transformation; this project is expected to reduce pressure on existing

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

landfill sites while creating a steady energy output and a net reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions.
k. manufacturing; and
Latrobe City is renowned for its engineering excellence due to heavy
industries prominent in the region. These include brown coal powered
electricity generation, open cut mining operations, oil and gas
exploration and extraction, pulp and paper manufacturing, as well as
agribusiness and associated industries.
Latrobe City calls for the recognition of its engineering capability by the
Federal Government to aid further economic development of the region.
To this end, Government could introduce measures and programs to
support entrepreneurship and innovation.
Defence Engineering
As the region’s economic base is diversified, defence has emerged as
an industry that has the potential to drive the region’s economic growth.
Latrobe City has the engineering capacity, experience and skills built
over generations which position it well to leverage defence opportunities
both nationally and internationally.
Aside from notable transferrable business and human capital skills, the
region hosts significant infrastructure assets such as rail, heavy road
access routes, large industrial sites suitable for heavy defence
engineering, as well as available appropriately zoned industrial land.
The Federal Government is encouraged to strengthen its recognition of
Latrobe City’s capabilities in relation to the defence supply chain, notably
engineering and fabrication businesses, and further increase its
knowledge of these opportunities through industry visits to Latrobe City.
Latrobe City Council has already engaged the Australian Defence
Alliance (ADA) (formerly Australia Industry Defence Network Vic) to
deliver a number of initiatives aimed to strengthen local industry’s
understanding of the opportunities in the defence supply chain. The ADA
assisted Council in the development of the Latrobe Valley Defence
Profile that has been established to showcase the world-class
engineering and manufacturing capability of the Latrobe Valley’s
industry.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

In addition, Federal Government funds support the Defence Materials
Technology Centre which Latrobe City has partnered with to deliver the
first Industry Capability Development program.
Food Manufacturing
Given its geographical position with integrated transport and access to
export markets, reliable and plentiful water and electricity supply, and a
stable and diverse workforce, Latrobe City is ideally positioned for food
processing facilities.
Latrobe City is an important commercial hub for the wider Gippsland
region. As an example of centralised processing, Lion (formally National
Foods), one of Australia’s largest food and beverage producers has
established a state of the art dairy processing plant in Latrobe City.
Building on Gippsland’s highly productive dairy, meat, horticulture and
vegetable production industries, which have significant processing and
value adding potential, the Latrobe City’s Food Manufacturing Precinct
provides for a high quality ‘modern’ industrial development to cater for
larger, high amenity, low density, manufacturing industries to meet
growing national and global demand for Gippsland’s quality produce.
Latrobe City’s Food Manufacturing Precinct will require some significant
investment to be further developed and to facilitate job growth and
investment in the broader region.
Timber Engineering
Latrobe City’s large natural resource supports productive timber and
forestry industries providing softwood, value-added hardwood, and
paper products sold to domestic and export markets. Australian Paper,
located in Latrobe City, is one of the largest paper manufacturing
facilities in the southern hemisphere. The Maryvale complex leads in the
manufacture of high performance packaging supplies and office paper.
The recent State Government announcement to phase out the logging of
native timber by 2030 has the potential to further disadvantage our
community. While the implications of this announcement on the
Gippsland’s timber industry are largely unknown at this stage, it is
expected that this move will have far-reaching implications on the
industry and result in significant job losses.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

Advanced Manufacturing
Latrobe City has a large manufacturing base, and our skilled
tradespeople continue to drive innovation and improvement of processes
to world’s best practice. The workforce has contributed to building the
nation with the rollout of road projects, establishment of power
generation facilities as well as water, rail and gas projects. A network of
business services offer expertise in the design and development of
specialist equipment for the mining, paper and pulp industries,
aerospace and other key sectors. Our workforce understands heavy
industry fabrication requirements from start to finish - from
commissioning of specialist equipment to providing assistance and
service to better manage equipment fatigue.
Latrobe City calls on Government’s recognition of its advanced
manufacturing capability, and support to address the limited access to
markets and higher regional transport costs as impediments to
manufacturing business in the region.
l. any other related matters.
Intensive Agribusiness
The global growth, including the discerning Asian middle class expected
to rise to over 3 billion people by 2030 is driving the increased demand
for food. Intensive agriculture and horticulture are seen as the way
forward, creating opportunities for new business.
Latrobe City’s proximity to Melbourne and the fast growing economies of
Asia maximises the opportunity to respond to the increased demand for
quality food products. Factors which contribute to the favourable
investment of intensive agribusiness include proximity to global markets,
affordable land, stable workforce, and existing industry.
Health and Wellbeing
Our community has a strong determination and will to build a strong and
prosperous future for this region, given the culmination of energy sector
transformation that will continue to affect our community. This change
and the economic diversification that is hoped to follow provide many
opportunities for this community to build its resilience and wellbeing. The
strength of the economy is directly linked with the capacity of our

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

workforce and the wellbeing of this community .Given the strengths and
innovation of the region’s health services, Latrobe City is well placed to
address its social wellbeing challenges into the future.
In response to the Hazelwood Mine Fire Inquiry, Victorian Government
established a Health Innovation Zone in the Latrobe Valley, the first of its
kind in Australia. This initiative paves the way for the innovative way of
integrating health services based on strong partnerships and provides
an opportunity to deliver creative and progressive community-based
approaches in health and well-being improvement.
The health sector is the largest employer in the region and is growing
steadily. The aging demographics are likely to drive further demand for
qualified employees in the health and aged care sectors.
Latrobe City is a centre for health services to the broader Gippsland
region through Latrobe Regional Hospital, Maryvale Private Hospital,
Latrobe Community Health Services and numerous medical providers.
While the region has a range of specialist services including pathology,
aged care, palliative care, community health, cancer support,
immunisation, disability services, home care, physiotherapy, parenting,
paediatric, child and adolescent services, access to some specialist care
and medical services remains an issue, requiring travel to access these
services in Melbourne.
Despite its strength and resilience, the Latrobe community continues to
experience high rates of disadvantage across a broad range of
indicators. This is also the case for many other regional and rural regions
of Australia that experience higher rates of disadvantage than
metropolitan centres. In Latrobe City this issue is compounded by the
inter-generational nature of that disadvantage, with many families
experiencing second and third generation unemployment and social
disadvantage.
Latrobe City on average has a higher level of Alcohol and Drug
treatment per population (89%), hospital admissions and ambulance
attendances than Victoria (Turning Point 2016-2017). At present the
State Government has committed to building a rehabilitation centre in
Traralgon, however this will only support younger people between the
ages of 16-21 and is yet to be constructed.

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

According to the SEIFA Index of Disadvantage Latrobe City is ranked
4th out of 79 Councils in Victoria. Demand for emergency relief and
other social services in the Latrobe area is consistently high, as stated
by Foodbank (2018) Australians in regional areas are 33% more likely to
experience food insecurity than those living in major and capital cities.
Latrobe City has the highest per capita rates of police attendance at
family violence incidents in Victoria, three times the state average.
Latrobe City Council has addressed these issues in its community-led
Municipal Public Health and Wellbeing Plan (MPHWP) 2017-2021 Living Well Latrobe to promote positive health and wellbeing in this
community, and to facilitate local health planning through partnerships.
Latrobe City Council requires Government funding to accelerate the
pace and breadth of actions and activities relating to the community’s
priorities within its MPHWP through the themes of:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Social & community connectedness;
Active living;
Health & wellbeing;
Safe at home;
Safe in the community;
Lifelong learning and opportunities

Council could, with sufficient funding, seek to expedite and concentrate
delivery of its long-term plan for intergenerational change in health and
social outcomes. The community holds a strong position that the future
of the Latrobe Valley is about more than economics, and social and
cultural aspects of the community life are of equal importance.
Visitor Economy
The visitor economy is a growing industry in Latrobe City. The region
has an existing diverse tourism offering, including an annual schedule of
major events, a variety of recreational and cultural facilities of an
international standard, an impressive tourism and recreational
infrastructure, and many natural attractions.
The proposed Gippsland Motorsport and Event Complex in Latrobe City
is a significant economic diversification and tourism attraction
opportunity that has the potential to boost the visitor economy not only
for Latrobe City but also for the Gippsland region as a whole. The

Regional Inequality in Australia
Submission 45 - Supplementary Submission

development of a high quality venue of an international standard would
be expected to significantly increase tourism and visitation numbers,
attract investment into the region, build the Latrobe City’s profile as a
high calibre Regional City, and support the growth of the region’s visitor
economy and related employment.

For any enquiries relating to this submission, please contact:

